IMAGES
Sign up for free
Log in
 Search metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
ABOUT BLOG PROJECTS HELP DONATE  CONTACT JOBS VOLUNTEER PEOPLE
Full text of "j-r-r-tolkien-lord-of-the-rings-01-the-fellowship-of-the-ring-retail-pdf"
See other formats
the  FELLOWSHIP 

OF  THE  RING 


J.R.R.  TOLKIEN 


THE  LOUD  OF  THE  RINGS 


PART  1 


THE  FELLOWSHIP 
OF  THE  RING 


BEING  THE  FIRST  PART  OF 

THE  LORD  OF  THE  RINGS 

BY 

J.R.R.  TOLKIEN 


£  HarperCollins  e-books 


Three  Rings  for  the  Elven-kings  under  the  sky, 

Seven  for  the  Dwarf-lords  in  their  halls  of  stone, 

Nine  for  Mortal  Men  doomed  to  die, 

One  for  the  Dark  Lord  on  his  dark  throne 
In  the  Land  of  Mordor  where  the  Shadows  lie. 

One  Ring  to  rule  them  all,  One  Ring  to  find  them, 

One  Ring  to  bring  them  all  and  in  the  darkness  bind  them 
In  the  Land  of  Mordor  where  the  Shadows  lie. 


CONTENTS 


Note  on  the  Text  ix 

Note  on  the  50th  Anniversary  Edition  xviii 

Foreword  to  the  Second  Edition  xxiii 

Prologue  Concerning  Hobbits,  and  other 

matters  1 


BOOK  ONE 


I 

A  Long-expected  Party 

27 

II 

The  Shadow  of  the  Past 

55 

III 

Three  is  Company 

85 

IV 

A  Short  Cut  to  Mushrooms 

112 

V 

A  Conspiracy  Unmasked 

128 

VI 

The  Old  Forest 

M3 

VII 

In  the  House  of  Tom  Bombadil 

161 

VIII 

Fog  on  the  Barrow-downs 

176 

IX 

At  the  Sign  of  The  Prancing  Pony 

195 

X 

Strider 

213 

XI 

A  Knife  in  the  Dark 

230 

XII 

BOOK 

Flight  to  the  Ford 

:  two 

257 

I 

Many  Meetings 

285 

II 

The  Council  of  Elrond 

311 

III 

The  Ring  Goes  South 

354 

CONTENTS 


viii 


IV 

A  Journey  in  the  Dark 

384 

V 

The  Bridge  of  Khazad-dum 

418 

VI 

Lothlorien 

433 

VII 

The  Mirror  of  Galadriel 

459 

VIII 

Farewell  to  Lorien 

478 

IX 

The  Great  River 

495 

X 

The  Breaking  of  the  Fellowship 

515 

Maps 

533 

Works  By  J.R.R.  Tolkien 

540 

Copyright 

541 

About  The  Publisher 

542 

NOTE  ON  THE  TEXT 


J.R.R.  Tolkien’s  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  is  often  erroneously 
called  a  trilogy,  when  it  is  in  fact  a  single  novel,  consisting 
of  six  books  plus  appendices,  sometimes  published  in  three 
volumes. 

The  first  volume,  The  Fellowship  of  the  Ring ,  was  published 
in  Great  Britain  by  the  London  firm  George  Allen  &  Unwin 
on  29  July  1954;  an  American  edition  followed  on  21  October 
of  the  same  year,  published  by  Houghton  Mifflin  Company 
of  Boston.  In  the  production  of  this  first  volume,  Tolkien 
experienced  what  became  for  him  a  continual  problem: 
printer’s  errors  and  compositor’s  mistakes,  including  well- 
intentioned  ‘corrections’  of  his  sometimes  idiosyncratic 
usage.  These  ‘corrections’  include  the  altering  of  dwarves  to 
dwarfs,  elvish  to  elfish,  further  to  farther,  nasturtians  to  nastur¬ 
tiums,  try  and  say  to  try  to  say  and  (‘worst  of  all’  to  Tolkien) 
elven  to  elfin.  In  a  work  such  as  The  Lord  of  the  Rings, 
containing  invented  languages  and  delicately  constructed 
nomenclatures,  errors  and  inconsistencies  impede  both  the 
understanding  and  the  appreciation  of  serious  readers  -  and 
Tolkien  had  many  such  readers  from  very  early  on.  Even 
before  the  publication  of  the  third  volume,  which  contained 
much  hitherto  unrevealed  information  on  the  invented  lan¬ 
guages  and  writing  systems,  Tolkien  received  many  letters 
from  readers  written  in  these  systems,  in  addition  to  numer¬ 
ous  enquiries  on  the  finer  points  of  their  usage. 

The  second  volume,  The  Two  Towers,  was  published  in 
England  on  11  November  1954  and  in  the  United  States  on 
21  April  1955.  Meanwhile  Tolkien  worked  to  keep  a  promise 
he  had  made  in  the  foreword  to  volume  one:  that  ‘an  index 
of  names  and  strange  words’  would  appear  in  the  third  vol¬ 
ume.  As  originally  planned,  this  index  would  contain  much 
etymological  information  on  the  languages,  particularly  on 
the  elven  tongues,  with  a  large  vocabulary.  It  proved  the  chief 


Xll 


NOTE  ON  THE  TEXT 


cause  of  the  delay  in  publishing  volume  three,  which  in  the 
end  contained  no  index  at  all,  only  an  apology  from  the 
publisher  for  its  absence.  For  Tolkien  had  abandoned  work 
on  it  after  indexing  volumes  one  and  two,  believing  its  size 
and  therefore  its  cost  to  be  ruinous. 

Volume  three,  The  Return  of  the  King,  finally  appeared  in 
England  on  20  October  1955  and  in  the  United  States  on 
5  January  1956.  With  the  appearance  of  the  third  volume, 
The  Lord  of  the  Rings  was  published  in  its  entirety,  and  its 
first  edition  text  remained  virtually  unchanged  for  a  decade. 
Tolkien  had  made  a  few  small  corrections,  but  further  errors 
entered  The  Fellowship  of  the  Ring  in  its  December  1954 
second  impression  when  the  printer,  having  distributed  the 
type  after  the  first  printing,  reset  the  book  without  informing 
the  author  or  publisher.  These  include  misrepresentations  of 
the  original  printed  text  -  that  is,  words  and  phrases  that 
read  acceptably  in  context,  but  which  depart  from  Tolkien’s 
wording  as  originally  written  and  published. 

In  1965,  stemming  from  what  then  appeared  to  be  copy¬ 
right  problems  in  the  United  States,  an  American  paperback 
firm  published  an  unauthorized  and  non-royalty-paying  edi¬ 
tion  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings.  For  this  new  edition  by  Ace 
Books  the  text  of  the  narrative  was  reset,  thus  introducing 
new  typographical  errors;  the  appendices,  however,  were 
reproduced  photographically  from  the  hardcover  edition,  and 
remain  consistent  with  it. 

Tolkien  set  to  work  on  his  first  revision  of  the  text  so  that 
a  newly  revised  and  authorized  edition  could  successfully 
compete  on  the  American  market.  This  first  revision  of  the 
text  was  published  in  America  in  paperback  by  Ballantine 
Books,  under  licence  from  Houghton  Mifflin,  in  October 
1965.  In  addition  to  revisions  within  the  text  itself,  Tolkien 
replaced  his  original  foreword  with  a  new  one.  He  was  pleased 
to  remove  the  original  foreword;  in  his  check  copy,  he 
wrote  of  it:  ‘confusing  (as  it  does)  real  personal  matters  with 
the  “machinery”  of  the  Tale,  is  a  serious  mistake’.  Tolkien 
also  added  an  extension  to  the  prologue  and  an  index  -  not 


NOTE  ON  THE  TEXT 


Xlll 


the  detailed  index  of  names  promised  in  the  first  edition, 
but,  rather,  a  bald  index  with  only  names  and  page  refer¬ 
ences.  Additionally,  at  this  time  the  appendices  were  greatly 
revised. 

Tolkien  received  his  copies  of  the  Ballantine  edition  in  late 
January  1966,  and  in  early  February  he  recorded  in  his  diary 
that  he  had  ‘worked  for  some  hours  on  the  Appendices  in 
Ballantine  version  &  found  more  errors  than  I  at  first 
expected’.  Soon  after  this  he  sent  a  small  number  of  further 
revisions  to  Ballantine  for  the  appendices,  including  the  now 
well-known  addition  of  ‘Estella  Bolger’  as  wife  of  Meriadoc 
in  the  family  trees  in  Appendix  C.  Most  of  these  revisions, 
which  entered  variously  in  the  third  and  fourth  impressions 
(June  and  August  1966)  of  volume  three,  and  which  were 
not  always  inserted  correctly  (thereby  causing  further  con¬ 
fusion  in  the  text),  somehow  never  made  it  into  the  main 
sequence  of  revision  in  the  three-volume  British  hardcover 
edition,  and  for  long  remained  anomalies.  Tolkien  once 
wrote,  concerning  the  revising  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings ,  that 
perhaps  he  had  failed  to  keep  his  notes  in  order;  this  errant 
branch  of  revision  seems  likely  to  be  an  example  of  that 
disorder  -  either  in  his  notes  or  in  the  ability  of  his  publishers 
to  follow  them  with  utmost  accuracy. 

The  revised  text  first  appeared  in  Great  Britain  in  a  three- 
volume  hardcover  ‘Second  Edition’  from  Allen  &  Unwin  on 
27  October  1966.  But  again  there  were  problems.  Although 
the  revisions  Tolkien  sent  to  America  of  the  text  itself  were 
available  to  be  utilized  in  the  new  British  edition,  his  extensive 
revisions  to  the  appendices  were  lost  after  being  entered  into 
the  Ballantine  edition.  Allen  &  Unwin  were  forced  to  reset  the 
appendices  using  the  copy  as  published  in  the  first  Ballantine 
edition.  This  did  not  include  Tolkien’s  second,  small  set  of 
revisions  sent  to  Ballantine;  but,  more  significantly,  it  did 
include  a  great  number  of  errors  and  omissions,  many  of 
which  were  not  discovered  until  long  afterwards.  Thus,  in 
the  appendices,  a  close  scrutiny  of  the  first  edition  text  and 
of  the  much  later  corrected  impressions  of  the  second  edition 


XIV 


NOTE  ON  THE  TEXT 


is  necessary  to  discern  whether  any  particular  change  in  this 
edition  is  authorial  or  erroneous. 

In  America,  the  revised  text  appeared  in  hardcover  in  the 
three-volume  edition  published  by  Houghton  Mifflin  on 
27  February  1967.  This  text  was  evidently  photo-offset  from 
the  1966  Allen  &  Unwin  three-volume  hardcover,  and  is  thus 
consistent  with  it.  Aside  from  the  first  printing  of  this  second 
Houghton  Mifflin  edition,  which  has  a  1967  date  on  the  title 
page,  none  of  the  many  reprintings  is  dated.  After  the  initial 
printings  of  this  edition,  which  bore  a  1966  copyright  notice, 
the  date  of  copyright  was  changed  in  1965  to  match  the 
statement  in  the  Ballantine  edition.  This  change  has  caused 
a  great  deal  of  confusion  for  librarians  and  other  researchers 
who  have  tried  to  sort  out  the  sequence  of  publication  of 
these  editions. 

Meanwhile,  Tolkien  spent  much  of  the  summer  of  1966 
further  revising  the  text.  In  June  he  learned  that  any  more 
revisions  were  too  late  for  inclusion  in  the  1966  Allen  & 
Unwin  second  edition,  and  he  recorded  in  his  diary:  ‘But  I 
am  attempting  to  complete  my  work  [on  the  revisions]  -  I 
cannot  leave  it  while  it  is  all  in  my  mind.  So  much  time  has 
been  wasted  in  all  my  work  by  this  constant  breaking  of 
threads.’  This  was  the  last  major  set  of  revisions  Tolkien 
himself  made  to  the  text  during  his  lifetime.  They  were  added 
to  the  second  impression  (1967)  of  the  three-volume  hard¬ 
cover  Allen  &  Unwin  second  edition.  The  revisions  them¬ 
selves  mostly  include  corrections  of  nomenclature  and 
attempts  at  consistency  of  usage  throughout  the  three  vol¬ 
umes.  Some  small  alterations  were  made  by  Tolkien  in  the 
1969  one-volume  India  paper  edition. 

J.R.R.  Tolkien  died  in  1973.  His  third  son  and  literary 
executor,  Christopher  Tolkien,  sent  a  large  number  of  further 
corrections  of  misprints,  mainly  in  the  appendices  and  index, 
to  Allen  &  Unwin  for  use  in  their  editions  in  1974.  Most  of 
these  corrections  were  typographical,  and  in  line  with  his 
father’s  expressed  intent  in  his  own  check  copies. 

Since  1974,  Christopher  Tolkien  has  sent  additional  cor- 


NOTE  ON  THE  TEXT 


XV 


rections,  as  errors  have  been  discovered,  to  the  British  pub¬ 
lishers  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  (Allen  &  Unwin,  later  Unwin 
Hyman,  and  now  HarperCollins),  who  have  tried  to  be  con¬ 
scientious  in  the  impossible  task  of  maintaining  a  textual 
integrity  in  whichever  editions  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  they 
have  published.  However,  every  time  the  text  has  been  reset 
for  publication  in  a  new  format  (e.g.  the  various  paperback 
editions  published  in  England  in  the  1970s  and  1980s),  huge 
numbers  of  new  misprints  have  crept  in,  though  at  times 
some  of  these  errors  have  been  observed  and  corrected  in 
later  printings.  Still,  throughout  these  years  the  three-volume 
British  hardcover  edition  has  retained  the  highest  textual 
integrity. 

In  the  United  States,  the  text  of  the  Ballantine  paperback 
has  remained  unchanged  for  more  than  three  decades  after 
Tolkien  added  his  few  revisions  in  1966.  The  text  in  all  of 
the  Houghton  Mifflin  editions  remained  unchanged  from 
1967  until  1987,  when  Houghton  Mifflin  photo-offset  the 
then  current  three-volume  British  hardcover  edition  in  order 
to  update  the  text  used  in  their  editions.  In  those  new 
reprintings  a  number  of  further  corrections  (overseen  by 
Christopher  Tolkien)  were  added,  and  the  errant  Ballantine 
branch  of  revision  (including  the  ‘Estella  Bolger’  addition) 
was  integrated  into  the  main  branch  of  textual  descent.  This 
method  of  correction  involved  a  cut-and-paste  process  with 
printed  versions  of  the  text.  Beginning  with  the  1987  Hough¬ 
ton  Mifflin  edition,  an  earlier  version  of  this  ‘Note  on  the 
Text’  (dated  October  1986)  was  added  to  The  Lord  of  the 
Rings.  This  ‘Note’  has  been  reworked  three  times  since  then 
-  the  version  dated  April  1993  first  appeared  in  1994,  and 
the  version  dated  April  2002  came  out  later  that  year.  The 
present  ‘Note’  replaces  and  supersedes  all  previous  versions. 

For  the  1994  British  edition  published  by  HarperCollins, 
the  text  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  was  entered  into  word¬ 
processing  files.  This  next  stage  of  textual  evolution  came 
about  to  allow  for  a  greater  uniformity  of  the  text  in  all  future 
editions,  but  with  it,  inevitably,  came  new  wrinkles.  Some 


XVI 


NOTE  ON  THE  TEXT 


new  misreadings  entered  into  the  text,  while  at  the  same  time 
others  were  fixed.  In  the  worst  instance,  one  line  of  the  ring 
inscription  in  the  chapter  ‘The  Shadow  of  the  Past’  of  The 
Fellowship  of  the  Ring  was  simply  dropped.  Unforeseeable 
glitches  arose  in  other  editions  when  the  base  computerized 
text  was  transferred  into  page-making  or  typesetting  pro¬ 
grams  -  e.g.,  in  one  edition  of  The  Fellowship  of  the  Ring ,  the 
closing  two  sentences  of  ‘The  Council  of  Elrond’  simply  and 
inexplicably  disappeared.  Such  glitches  have  been  very  much 
the  exception,  not  the  rule,  and  the  text  has  otherwise  main¬ 
tained  a  consistency  and  integrity  throughout  its  com¬ 
puterized  evolution. 

The  1 994  edition  also  contained  a  number  of  new  correc¬ 
tions  (again  supervised  by  Christopher  Tolkien),  as  well  as  a 
reconfigured  index  of  names  and  page  references.  The  1994 
text  was  first  used  in  American  editions  published  by  Hough¬ 
ton  Mifflin  in  1999.  A  small  number  of  further  corrections 
were  added  into  the  2002  three-volume  edition  illustrated  by 
Alan  Lee,  published  by  HarperCollins  in  Great  Britain  and 
Houghton  Mifflin  in  the  United  States. 

The  textual  history  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings,  merely  in  its 
published  form,  is  a  vast  and  complex  web.  In  this  brief 
note  I  have  given  only  a  glimpse  of  the  overall  sequence  and 
structure.  Further  details  on  the  revisions  and  corrections 
made  over  the  years  to  the  published  text  of  The  Lord  of  the 
Rings,  and  a  fuller  account  of  its  publishing  history,  may  be 
found  in  J.R.R.  Tolkien:  A  Descriptive  Bibliography,  by  Wayne 
G.  Hammond,  with  the  assistance  of  Douglas  A.  Anderson 
(1993)- 

For  those  interested  in  observing  the  gradual  evolving  of 
The  Lord  of  the  Rings  from  its  earliest  drafts  to  its  published 
form,  I  highly  recommend  Christopher  Tolkien’s  account, 
which  appears  within  five  volumes  of  his  twelve-volume  series 
The  History  of  Middle-earth.  Volumes  six  through  nine  con¬ 
tain  the  major  part  of  his  study  pertaining  to  The  Lord  of  the 
Rings'.  The  Return  of  the  Shadow  (1988);  The  Treason  of 


NOTE  ON  THE  TEXT 


XVII 


Isengard  (1989);  The  War  of  the  Ring  (1990);  and  Sauron 
Defeated  (1992).  Also,  the  final  book  of  the  series,  The  Peoples 
of  Middle-earth  (1996),  covers  the  evolution  of  the  prologue 
and  appendices  to  The  Lord  of  the  Rings.  These  volumes 
contain  an  engrossing  over-the-shoulder  account  of  the 
growth  and  writing  of  Tolkien’s  masterpiece. 

The  process  of  studying  Tolkien’s  manuscripts  of  The  Lord 
of  the  Rings  involved  the  deciphering  of  versions  where 
Tolkien  wrote  first  in  pencil  and  then  in  ink  atop  the  pencilled 
draft.  Christopher  Tolkien  has  decribed  his  father’s  method 
of  composition  in  The  Return  of  the  Shadow.  ‘In  the  handwrit¬ 
ing  that  he  used  for  rapid  drafts  and  sketches,  not  intended 
to  endure  long  before  he  turned  to  them  again  and  gave  them 
a  more  workable  form,  letters  are  so  loosely  formed  that  a 
word  which  cannot  be  deduced  or  guessed  at  from  the  con¬ 
text  or  from  later  versions  can  prove  perfectly  opaque  after 
long  examination;  and  if,  as  he  often  did,  he  used  a  soft  pencil 
much  has  now  become  blurred  and  faint.’  The  true  difficulty 
of  reading  such  double-drafts  can  be  observed  in  the  frontis¬ 
piece  to  The  War  of  the  Ring,  which  reproduces  in  colour 
Tolkien’s  illustration  of  ‘Shelob’s  Lair’  from  a  page  of 
Tolkien’s  manuscript.  Looking  very  closely  at  the  hasty  ink 
draft  alongside  the  illustration,  one  can  see  underneath  it  the 
earlier,  hastier,  pencilled  draft.  Also  in  The  War  of  the  Ring, 
Christopher  Tolkien  reproduces  a  page  from  the  first  manu¬ 
script  of  the  chapter  ‘The  Taming  of  Smeagol’,  and  the 
printed  text  corresponding  to  this  text  is  on  the  facing  page 
(see  pp.  90-91).  One  is  astonished  at  anyone’s  ability  to 
decipher  such  texts. 

That  difficulty  aside,  just  what  do  these  books  signify  to 
ordinary  readers  and  to  Tolkien  scholars?  And  what  is  ‘the 
history  of  the  writing’  of  a  book?  Simply,  these  volumes  show 
in  great  detail  the  development  of  the  story  of  The  Lord  of 
the  Rings  from  its  very  earliest  drafts  and  hasty  projections 
through  its  completion.  We  see  in  the  earliest  materials  what 
is  very  much  a  children’s  book,  a  sequel  to  The  Hobbit,  and 
as  the  story  grows  through  various  ‘phases’,  there  is  an 


XV111 


NOTE  ON  THE  TEXT 


increase  in  seriousness  and  depth.  We  see  alternate  branches 
of  development,  the  gradual  blending  and  merging  of  certain 
characters,  and  the  slow  emergence  of  the  nature  of  the  rings 
and  of  the  motivations  of  other  characters.  Some  of  these 
various  ideas  are  abandoned  altogether,  while  others  are 
reworked  into  some  variant  form  that  may  or  may  not  survive 
into  the  final  version. 

One  could  make  a  whole  catalogue  of  interesting  tidbits 
from  Christopher  Tolkien’s  study  -  such  as  the  fact  that 
Strider  was  called  Trotter  until  a  very  late  stage  in  the  writing 
of  the  book;  that  Trotter  was  at  one  time  a  hobbit,  so  named 
because  he  wore  wooden  shoes;  that  Tolkien  at  one  point 
considered  a  romance  between  Aragorn  and  Eowyn;  that 
Tolkien  wrote  an  epilogue  to  the  book,  tying  up  loose  ends, 
but  it  was  dropped  before  publication  (and  now  appears  in 
Sanron  Defeated)-,  and  so  on.  But  these  developments  are  best 
appreciated  when  read  within  the  context  of  Christopher 
Tolkien’s  commentary  rather  than  discussed  separately. 

The  most  significant  achievement  of  these  volumes  is  that 
they  show  us  how  Tolkien  wrote  and  thought.  Nowhere  else 
do  we  see  the  authorial  process  itself  at  work  in  such  detail. 
Tolkien’s  hastiest  comments  about  where  the  story  might 
proceed,  or  why  it  can  or  can’t  go  such  and  such  a  way  - 
these  queries  to  himself  were  written  out:  Tolkien  is  literally 
thinking  on  paper.  This  gives  an  added  dimension  of  under¬ 
standing  to  Tolkien’s  comment  to  Stanley  Unwin  in  a  1963 
letter  that,  when  suffering  from  trouble  with  his  shoulder  and 
right  arm,  ‘I  found  not  being  able  to  use  a  pen  or  pencil  as 
defeating  as  the  loss  of  her  beak  would  be  to  a  hen.’  And  we, 
as  readers  of  these  volumes,  can  share  with  Tolkien  himself 
the  wonder  and  bewilderment  of  new  characters  appearing 
as  if  from  nowhere,  or  of  some  other  sudden  change  or  devel¬ 
opment,  at  the  very  moment  of  their  emergence  into  the 
story. 

I  know  of  no  other  instance  in  literature  where  we  have 
such  a  ‘history  of  the  writing’  of  a  book,  told  mostly  by  the 
author  himself,  with  all  the  hesitations  and  false  paths  laid 


NOTE  ON  THE  TEXT 


XIX 


out  before  us,  sorted  out,  commented  upon,  and  served  up 
to  a  reader  like  a  feast.  We  are  shown  innumerable  instances 
in  the  minutest  detail  of  the  thought-process  itself  at  work. 
We  see  the  author  fully  absorbed  in  creation  for  its  own  sake. 
And  this  is  all  the  more  exceptional  because  this  is  a  history 
not  only  of  the  unfolding  of  a  story  and  its  text,  but  of  the 
evolution  of  a  world.  There  is  an  additional  wealth  of  material 
beyond  simple  narrative  text.  There  are  maps  and  illustra¬ 
tions.  There  are  languages  and  writing  systems,  and  the  his¬ 
tories  of  the  peoples  who  spoke  and  wrote  in  these  systems. 
All  of  these  additional  materials  add  multiple  dimensions  of 
complexity  to  our  appreciation  of  the  invented  world  itself. 

Fifty  years  into  the  published  life  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings, 
it  seems  extraordinary  to  me  that  we  have  not  only  such  a 
masterful  work  of  literature  but  also  as  a  companion  to  it  an 
unparalleled  account  of  its  writing.  Our  gratitude  as  readers 
goes  to  both  of  the  Tolkiens,  father  and  son. 

Douglas  A.  Anderson 
May  2004 


NOTE  ON  THE  50™  ANNIVERSARY 
EDITION 


In  this  edition  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings,  prepared  for  the 
fiftieth  anniversary  of  its  publication,  between  three  and  four 
hundred  emendations  have  been  made  following  an  exhaus¬ 
tive  review  of  past  editions  and  printings.  The  present  text 
is  based  on  the  setting  of  the  HarperCollins  three-volume 
hardcover  edition  of  2002,  which  in  turn  was  a  revision  of  the 
HarperCollins  reset  edition  of  1994.  As  Douglas  A.  Anderson 
comments  in  the  preceding  ‘Note  on  the  Text’,  each  of  those 
editions  was  itself  corrected,  and  each  also  introduced  new 
errors.  At  the  same  time,  other  errors  survived  undetected, 
among  them  some  five  dozen  which  entered  as  long  ago  as 
1954,  in  the  resetting  of  The  Fellowship  of  the  Ring  published 
as  its  ‘second  impression’. 

That  the  printer  had  quietly  reset  The  Fellowship  of  the 
Ring,  and  that  copies  had  been  issued  without  proof  having 
been  read  by  the  author,  never  became  known  to  Tolkien; 
while  his  publisher,  Rayner  Unwin,  learned  of  it  only  thirty- 
eight  years  after  the  fact.  Tolkien  found  a  few  of  the  unautho¬ 
rized  changes  introduced  in  the  second  printing  when 
(probably  while  preparing  the  second  edition  in  1965)  he 
read  a  copy  of  the  twelfth  impression  (1962),  but  thought 
the  errors  newly  made.  These,  among  others,  were  corrected 
in  the  course  of  the  reprinting.  Then  in  1992  Eric  Thompson, 
a  reader  with  a  keen  eye  for  typographic  detail,  noticed  small 
differences  between  the  first  and  second  impressions  of  The 
Fellowship  of  the  Ring  and  called  them  to  the  attention  of  the 
present  editors.  About  one-sixth  of  the  errors  that  entered  in 
the  second  printing  quickly  came  to  light.  Many  more  were 
revealed  only  recently,  when  Steven  M.  Frisby  used  ingenious 
optical  aids  to  make  a  comparison  of  copies  of  The  Lord  of 
the  Rings  in  greater  detail  than  was  previously  accomplished. 


NOTE  ON  THE  50th  ANNIVERSARY  EDITION 


XXI 


We  have  gladly  made  full  use  of  Mr  Frisby’s  results,  which 
he  has  generously  shared  and  discussed. 

In  the  course  of  its  fifty-year  history  The  Lord  of  the  Rings 
has  had  many  such  readers  who  have  recorded  changes  made 
between  its  various  appearances  in  print,  both  to  document 
what  has  gone  before  and  to  aid  in  the  achievement  of  an 
authoritative  text.  Errors  or  possible  errors  were  reported  to 
the  author  himself  or  to  his  publishers,  and  information  on 
the  textual  history  of  the  work  circulated  among  Tolkien 
enthusiasts  at  least  as  early  as  1966,  when  Banks  Mebane 
published  his  ‘Prolegomena  to  a  Variorum  Tolkien’  in  the 
fanzine  Entmoot.  Most  notably  in  later  years,  Douglas  A. 
Anderson  has  been  in  the  forefront  of  efforts  to  achieve  an 
accurate  text  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  (and  of  The  Hobbit); 
Christina  Scull  has  published  ‘A  Preliminary  Study  of  Vari¬ 
ations  in  Editions  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings’  in  Beyond  Bree 
(April  and  August  1985);  Wayne  G.  Hammond  has  compiled 
extensive  lists  of  textual  changes  in  J.R.R.  Tolkien:  A  Descrip¬ 
tive  Bibliography  (1993);  and  David  Bratman  has  published 
an  important  article,  ‘A  Corrigenda  to  The  Lord  of  the  Rings’, 
in  the  March  1994  number  of  The  Tolkien  Collector.  The 
observations  of  Dainis  Bisenieks,  Yuval  Welis,  Charles  Noad, 
and  other  readers,  sent  to  us  directly  or  posted  in  public 
forums,  have  also  been  of  service. 

Efforts  such  as  these  follow  the  example  of  the  author  of 
The  Lord  of  the  Rings  during  his  lifetime.  His  concern  for  the 
textual  accuracy  and  coherence  of  his  work  is  evident  from 
the  many  emendations  he  made  in  later  printings,  and  from 
notes  he  made  for  other  emendations  which  for  one  reason 
or  another  have  not  previously  (or  have  only  partly)  been  put 
into  effect.  Even  late  in  life,  when  such  labours  wearied  him, 
his  feelings  were  clear.  On  30  October  1967  he  wrote  to  Joy 
Hill  at  George  Allen  &  Unwin,  concerning  a  reader’s  query 
he  had  received  about  points  in  the  Appendices  to  The  Lord 
of  the  Rings :  ‘Personally  I  have  ceased  to  bother  about  these 
minor  “discrepancies”,  since  if  the  genealogies  and  calendars 
etc.  lack  verisimilitude  it  is  in  their  general  excessive  accuracy: 


XXU  NOTE  ON  THE  50th  ANNIVERSARY  EDITION 


as  compared  with  real  annals  or  genealogies!  Anyway  the 
slips  were  few,  have  now  mostly  been  removed,  and  the  dis¬ 
covery  of  what  remain  seems  an  amusing  pastime!  But  errors 
in  the  text  are  another  matter'  (italics  ours).  In  fact  Tolkien 
had  not  ‘ceased  to  bother’,  and  ‘slips’  were  dealt  with  as 
opportunities  arose.  These,  and  the  indulgence  of  his  pub¬ 
lisher,  allowed  Tolkien  a  luxury  few  authors  enjoy:  multiple 
chances  not  only  to  correct  his  text  but  to  improve  it,  and  to 
further  develop  the  languages,  geography,  and  peoples  of 
Middle-earth. 

The  fiftieth  anniversary  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  seemed  an 
ideal  opportunity  to  consider  the  latest  (2002)  text  in  light  of 
information  we  had  gathered  in  the  course  of  decades  of  work 
in  Tolkien  studies,  with  Steve  Frisby’s  research  at  hand,  and 
with  an  electronic  copy  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  (supplied  by 
HarperCollins)  searchable  by  keyword  or  phrase.  The  latter 
especially  allowed  us  to  develop  lists  of  words  that  varied 
from  one  instance  to  another,  and  investigate  variations  in 
usage,  as  they  stood  in  the  copy-text  and  relative  to  earlier 
editions  and  printings.  Of  course  Tolkien  wrote  The  Lord  of 
the  Rings  over  so  long  a  period  of  time,  some  eighteen  years, 
that  inconsistencies  in  its  text  were  almost  inevitable.  Chris¬ 
topher  Tolkien  even  observed  to  us  that  some  apparent 
inconsistencies  of  form  in  his  father’s  work  may  even  have 
been  deliberate:  for  instance,  although  Tolkien  carefully  dis¬ 
tinguished  house  ‘dwelling’  from  House  ‘noble  family  or  dyn¬ 
asty’,  in  two  instances  he  used  house  in  the  latter  sense  but 
in  lower  case,  perhaps  because  a  capital  letter  would  have 
detracted  from  the  importance  of  the  adjective  with  which 
the  word  was  paired  (‘royal  house’,  ‘golden  house’).  There 
can  be  no  doubt,  however,  that  Tolkien  attempted  to  correct 
inconsistency,  no  less  than  outright  error,  whenever  it  came 
to  his  attention,  and  it  was  our  opinion,  with  the  advice  and 
agreement  of  Christopher  Tolkien,  that  an  attempt  should  be 
made  to  do  so  in  the  anniversary  edition,  in  so  far  as  we  could 
carefully  and  conservatively  distinguish  what  to  emend. 

Many  of  the  emendations  in  the  present  text  are  to  marks 


NOTE  ON  THE  50th  ANNIVERSARY  EDITION  XXU1 


of  punctuation,  either  to  correct  recent  typographical  errors 
or  to  repair  surviving  alterations  introduced  in  the  second 
printing  of  The  Fellowship  of  the  Ring.  In  the  latter  respect 
and  in  every  case,  Tolkien’s  original  punctuation  is  always 
more  felicitous  -  subtle  points,  when  one  is  comparing  com¬ 
mas  and  semi-colons,  but  no  less  a  part  of  the  author’s 
intended  expression.  Distinctive  words  such  as  chill  rather 
than  cold ,  and  glistered  rather  than  glistened ,  changed  by  type¬ 
setters  long  ago  without  authorization,  likewise  have  been 
restored.  A  controlled  amount  of  regularization  also  seemed 
called  for,  such  as  naught  rather  than  nought ,  a  change  insti¬ 
tuted  by  Tolkien  but  not  carried  through  in  all  instances; 
Dark  Power  rather  than  dark  power  when  the  reference  is 
obviously  to  Sauron  (or  Movgoth)',  Barrow-downs  by  Tolkien’s 
preference  rather  than  Barrowdowns;  likewise  Bree-hill  rather 
than  Bree  Hill ;  accented  and  more  common  Driiadan  rather 
than  Druadan;  capitalized  names  of  seasons  when  used  as 
personification  or  metaphor,  according  to  Tolkien’s  predomi¬ 
nant  practice  and  the  internal  logic  of  the  text;  and  Elvish 
rather  than  elvish  when  used  as  a  separate  adjective,  following 
a  preference  Tolkien  marked  in  his  copy  of  the  second  edition 
of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings.  In  addition,  we  have  added  a  second 
accent  to  Numendrean(s),  as  Tolkien  often  wrote  the  name  in 
manuscript  and  as  it  appears  in  The  Silmarillion  and  other 
posthumous  publications. 

The  result,  nonetheless,  still  includes  many  variations  in 
capitalization,  punctuation,  and  other  points  of  style.  Not  all 
of  these  are  erroneous:  they  include  words  such  as  Sun,  Moon, 
Hobbit,  and  Man  (or  sun,  moon,  hobbit,  man),  which  may 
change  form  according  to  meaning  or  application,  in  relation 
to  adjacent  adjectives,  or  whether  Tolkien  intended  personi¬ 
fication,  poetry,  or  emphasis.  His  intent  cannot  be  divined 
with  confidence  in  every  case.  But  it  is  possible  to  discern 
Tolkien’s  preferences  in  many  instances,  from  statements  he 
wrote  in  his  check  copies  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  or  from  a 
close  analysis  of  its  text  in  manuscript,  typescript,  proof,  and 
print.  Whenever  there  has  been  any  doubt  whatsoever  as  to 


xxiv  NOTE  ON  THE  50th  ANNIVERSARY  EDITION 

the  author’s  intentions,  the  text  has  been  allowed  to  stand. 

Most  of  the  demonstrable  errors  noted  by  Christopher 
Tolkien  in  The  History  of  Middle-earth  also  have  been  cor¬ 
rected,  such  as  the  distance  from  the  Brandywine  Bridge  to 
the  Ferry  ( ten  miles  rather  than  twenty)  and  the  number  of 
Merry’s  ponies  (five  rather  than  six),  shadows  of  earlier 
drafts.  But  those  inconsistencies  of  content,  such  as  Gimli’s 
famous  (and  erroneous)  statement  in  Book  III,  Chapter  7, 
‘Till  now  I  have  hewn  naught  but  wood  since  I  left  Moria’, 
which  would  require  rewriting  to  emend  rather  than  simple 
correction,  remain  unchanged. 

So  many  new  emendations  to  The  Lord  of  the  Rings,  and 
such  an  extensive  review  of  its  text,  deserve  to  be  fully  docu¬ 
mented.  Although  most  readers  will  be  content  with  the  text 
alone,  many  will  want  to  know  more  about  the  problems 
encountered  in  preparing  this  new  edition,  and  their  solutions 
(where  solutions  have  been  possible),  especially  where  the 
text  has  been  emended,  but  also  where  it  has  not.  To  this 
end,  and  to  illuminate  the  work  in  other  respects,  we  are 
preparing  a  volume  of  annotations  to  The  Lord  of  the  Rings 
for  publication  in  2005.  This  will  allow  us  to  discuss,  at  a 
length  impossible  in  a  prefatory  note,  the  various  textual 
cruces  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings,  to  identify  changes  that  have 
been  made  to  the  present  text,  and  to  remark  on  significant 
alterations  to  the  published  work  throughout  its  history.  We 
will  also  explain  archaic  or  unusual  words  and  names  in  The 
Lord  of  the  Rings,  explore  literary  and  historical  influences, 
note  connections  with  Tolkien’s  other  writings,  and  comment 
on  differences  between  its  drafts  and  published  form,  on 
questions  of  language,  and  on  much  else  that  we  hope  will 
interest  readers  and  enhance  their  enjoyment  of  Tolkien’s 
masterpiece. 


Wayne  G.  Hammond  &  Christina  Scull 

May  2004 


FOREWORD  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 


This  tale  grew  in  the  telling,  until  it  became  a  history  of  the 
Great  War  of  the  Ring  and  included  many  glimpses  of  the 
yet  more  ancient  history  that  preceded  it.  It  was  begun  soon 
after  The  Hobbit  was  written  and  before  its  publication  in 
1 937;  but  I  did  not  go  on  with  this  sequel,  for  I  wished  first 
to  complete  and  set  in  order  the  mythology  and  legends  of 
the  Elder  Days,  which  had  then  been  taking  shape  for  some 
years.  I  desired  to  do  this  for  my  own  satisfaction,  and  I  had 
little  hope  that  other  people  would  be  interested  in  this  work, 
especially  since  it  was  primarily  linguistic  in  inspiration  and 
was  begun  in  order  to  provide  the  necessary  background  of 
‘history’  for  Elvish  tongues. 

When  those  whose  advice  and  opinion  I  sought  corrected 
little  hope  to  no  hope ,  I  went  back  to  the  sequel,  encouraged 
by  requests  from  readers  for  more  information  concerning 
hobbits  and  their  adventures.  But  the  story  was  drawn  irre¬ 
sistibly  towards  the  older  world,  and  became  an  account,  as 
it  were,  of  its  end  and  passing  away  before  its  beginning  and 
middle  had  been  told.  The  process  had  begun  in  the  writing 
of  The  Hobbit ,  in  which  there  were  already  some  references 
to  the  older  matter:  Elrond,  Gondolin,  the  High-elves,  and 
the  ores,  as  well  as  glimpses  that  had  arisen  unbidden  of 
things  higher  or  deeper  or  darker  than  its  surface:  Durin, 
Moria,  Gandalf,  the  Necromancer,  the  Ring.  The  discovery 
of  the  significance  of  these  glimpses  and  of  their  relation  to 
the  ancient  histories  revealed  the  Third  Age  and  its  culmi¬ 
nation  in  the  War  of  the  Ring. 

Those  who  had  asked  for  more  information  about  hobbits 
eventually  got  it,  but  they  had  to  wait  a  long  time;  for  the 
composition  of  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  went  on  at  intervals 
during  the  years  1936  to  1949,  a  period  in  which  I  had  many 
duties  that  I  did  not  neglect,  and  many  other  interests  as  a 
learner  and  teacher  that  often  absorbed  me.  The  delay  was, 


XXVI 


FOREWORD  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 


of  course,  also  increased  by  the  outbreak  of  war  in  1939,  by 
the  end  of  which  year  the  tale  had  not  yet  reached  the  end  of 
Book  One.  In  spite  of  the  darkness  of  the  next  five  years  I 
found  that  the  story  could  not  now  be  wholly  abandoned, 
and  I  plodded  on,  mostly  by  night,  till  I  stood  by  Balin’s  tomb 
in  Moria.  There  I  halted  for  a  long  while.  It  was  almost  a 
year  later  when  I  went  on  and  so  came  to  Lothlorien  and  the 
Great  River  late  in  1941.  In  the  next  year  I  wrote  the  first 
drafts  of  the  matter  that  now  stands  as  Book  Three,  and  the 
beginnings  of  chapters  I  and  III  of  Book  Five;  and  there  as 
the  beacons  flared  in  Anorien  and  Theoden  came  to  Harrow- 
dale  I  stopped.  Foresight  had  failed  and  there  was  no  time 
for  thought. 

It  was  during  1 944  that,  leaving  the  loose  ends  and  perplex¬ 
ities  of  a  war  which  it  was  my  task  to  conduct,  or  at  least  to 
report,  I  forced  myself  to  tackle  the  journey  of  Frodo  to 
Mordor.  These  chapters,  eventually  to  become  Book  Four, 
were  written  and  sent  out  as  a  serial  to  my  son,  Christopher, 
then  in  South  Africa  with  the  RAF.  Nonetheless  it  took 
another  five  years  before  the  tale  was  brought  to  its  present 
end;  in  that  time  I  changed  my  house,  my  chair,  and  my 
college,  and  the  days  though  less  dark  were  no  less  laborious. 
Then  when  the  ‘end’  had  at  last  been  reached  the  whole  story 
had  to  be  revised,  and  indeed  largely  re-written  backwards. 
And  it  had  to  be  typed,  and  re-typed:  by  me;  the  cost  of 
professional  typing  by  the  ten-fingered  was  beyond  my 
means. 

The  Lord  of  the  Rings  has  been  read  by  many  people  since 
it  finally  appeared  in  print;  and  I  should  like  to  say  something 
here  with  reference  to  the  many  opinions  or  guesses  that  I 
have  received  or  have  read  concerning  the  motives  and  mean¬ 
ing  of  the  tale.  The  prime  motive  was  the  desire  of  a  tale-teller 
to  try  his  hand  at  a  really  long  story  that  would  hold  the 
attention  of  readers,  amuse  them,  delight  them,  and  at  times 
maybe  excite  them  or  deeply  move  them.  As  a  guide  I  had 
only  my  own  feelings  for  what  is  appealing  or  moving,  and 
for  many  the  guide  was  inevitably  often  at  fault.  Some  who 


FOREWORD  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 


XXV11 


have  read  the  book,  or  at  any  rate  have  reviewed  it,  have 
found  it  boring,  absurd,  or  contemptible;  and  I  have  no  cause 
to  complain,  since  I  have  similar  opinions  of  their  works,  or 
of  the  lands  of  writing  that  they  evidently  prefer.  But  even 
from  the  points  of  view  of  many  who  have  enjoyed  my  story 
there  is  much  that  fails  to  please.  It  is  perhaps  not  possible 
in  a  long  tale  to  please  everybody  at  all  points,  nor  to  displease 
everybody  at  the  same  points;  for  I  find  from  the  letters  that 
I  have  received  that  the  passages  or  chapters  that  are  to  some 
a  blemish  are  all  by  others  specially  approved.  The  most 
critical  reader  of  all,  myself,  now  finds  many  defects,  minor 
and  major,  but  being  fortunately  under  no  obligation  either 
to  review  the  book  or  to  write  it  again,  he  will  pass  over  these 
in  silence,  except  one  that  has  been  noted  by  others:  the  book 
is  too  short. 

As  for  any  inner  meaning  or  ‘message’,  it  has  in  the  inten¬ 
tion  of  the  author  none.  It  is  neither  allegorical  nor  topical. 
As  the  story  grew  it  put  down  roots  (into  the  past)  and  threw 
out  unexpected  branches:  but  its  main  theme  was  settled 
from  the  outset  by  the  inevitable  choice  of  the  Ring  as  the 
link  between  it  and  The  Hobbit.  The  crucial  chapter,  ‘The 
Shadow  of  the  Past’,  is  one  of  the  oldest  parts  of  the  tale.  It 
was  written  long  before  the  foreshadow  of  1939  had  yet 
become  a  threat  of  inevitable  disaster,  and  from  that  point 
the  story  would  have  developed  along  essentially  the  same 
lines,  if  that  disaster  had  been  averted.  Its  sources  are  things 
long  before  in  mind,  or  in  some  cases  already  written,  and 
little  or  nothing  in  it  was  modified  by  the  war  that  began  in 
1939  or  its  sequels. 

The  real  war  does  not  resemble  the  legendary  war  in  its 
process  or  its  conclusion.  If  it  had  inspired  or  directed  the 
development  of  the  legend,  then  certainly  the  Ring  would 
have  been  seized  and  used  against  Sauron;  he  would  not  have 
been  annihilated  but  enslaved,  and  Barad-dur  would  not  have 
been  destroyed  but  occupied.  Saruman,  failing  to  get  pos¬ 
session  of  the  Ring,  would  in  the  confusion  and  treacheries 
of  the  time  have  found  in  Mordor  the  missing  links  in  his 


XXVUl 


FOREWORD  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 


own  researches  into  Ring-lore,  and  before  long  he  would 
have  made  a  Great  Ring  of  his  own  with  which  to  challenge 
the  self-styled  Ruler  of  Middle-earth.  In  that  conflict  both 
sides  would  have  held  hobbits  in  hatred  and  contempt:  they 
would  not  long  have  survived  even  as  slaves. 

Other  arrangements  could  be  devised  according  to  the 
tastes  or  views  of  those  who  like  allegory  or  topical  reference. 
But  I  cordially  dislike  allegory  in  all  its  manifestations,  and 
always  have  done  so  since  I  grew  old  and  wary  enough  to 
detect  its  presence.  I  much  prefer  history,  true  or  feigned, 
with  its  varied  applicability  to  the  thought  and  experience  of 
readers.  I  think  that  many  confuse  ‘applicability’  with  ‘alle¬ 
gory’;  but  the  one  resides  in  the  freedom  of  the  reader,  and 
the  other  in  the  purposed  domination  of  the  author. 

An  author  cannot  of  course  remain  wholly  unaffected  by 
his  experience,  but  the  ways  in  which  a  story-germ  uses  the 
soil  of  experience  are  extremely  complex,  and  attempts  to 
define  the  process  are  at  best  guesses  from  evidence  that  is 
inadequate  and  ambiguous.  It  is  also  false,  though  naturally 
attractive,  when  the  fives  of  an  author  and  critic  have  over¬ 
lapped,  to  suppose  that  the  movements  of  thought  or  the 
events  of  times  common  to  both  were  necessarily  the  most 
powerful  influences.  One  has  indeed  personally  to  come 
under  the  shadow  of  war  to  feel  fully  its  oppression;  but  as 
the  years  go  by  it  seems  now  often  forgotten  that  to  be  caught 
in  youth  by  1914  was  no  less  hideous  an  experience  than  to 
be  involved  in  1939  and  the  following  years.  By  1918  all  but 
one  of  my  close  friends  were  dead.  Or  to  take  a  less  grievous 
matter:  it  has  been  supposed  by  some  that  ‘The  Scouring  of 
the  Shire’  reflects  the  situation  in  England  at  the  time  when 
I  was  finishing  my  tale.  It  does  not.  It  is  an  essential  part  of 
the  plot,  foreseen  from  the  outset,  though  in  the  event  modi¬ 
fied  by  the  character  of  Saruman  as  developed  in  the  story 
without,  need  I  say,  any  allegorical  significance  or  contem¬ 
porary  political  reference  whatsoever.  It  has  indeed  some 
basis  in  experience,  though  slender  (for  the  economic  situ¬ 
ation  was  entirely  different),  and  much  further  back.  The 


FOREWORD  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 


XXIX 


country  in  which  I  lived  in  childhood  was  being  shabbily 
destroyed  before  I  was  ten,  in  days  when  motor-cars  were 
rare  objects  (I  had  never  seen  one)  and  men  were  still  building 
suburban  railways.  Recently  I  saw  in  a  paper  a  picture  of  the 
last  decrepitude  of  the  once  thriving  corn-mill  beside  its  pool 
that  long  ago  seemed  to  me  so  important.  I  never  liked  the 
looks  of  the  Young  miller,  but  his  father,  the  Old  miller,  had 
a  black  beard,  and  he  was  not  named  Sandyman. 

The  Lord  of  the  Rings  is  now  issued  in  a  new  edition,  and 
the  opportunity  has  been  taken  of  revising  it.  A  number  of 
errors  and  inconsistencies  that  still  remained  in  the  text  have 
been  corrected,  and  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  provide 
information  on  a  few  points  which  attentive  readers  have 
raised.  I  have  considered  all  their  comments  and  enquiries, 
and  if  some  seem  to  have  been  passed  over  that  may  be 
because  I  have  failed  to  keep  my  notes  in  order;  but  many 
enquiries  could  only  be  answered  by  additional  appendices, 
or  indeed  by  the  production  of  an  accessory  volume  contain¬ 
ing  much  of  the  material  that  I  did  not  include  in  the  original 
edition,  in  particular  more  detailed  linguistic  information.  In 
the  meantime  this  edition  offers  this  Foreword,  an  addition 
to  the  Prologue,  some  notes,  and  an  index  of  the  names  of 
persons  and  places.  This  index  is  in  intention  complete  in 
items  but  not  in  references,  since  for  the  present  purpose  it 
has  been  necessary  to  reduce  its  built.  A  complete  index, 
making  full  use  of  the  material  prepared  for  me  by  Mrs.  N. 
Smith,  belongs  rather  to  the  accessory  volume. 


PROLOGUE 


i 

Concerning  Hobbits 

This  book  is  largely  concerned  with  Hobbits,  and  from  its 
pages  a  reader  may  discover  much  of  their  character  and  a 
little  of  their  history.  Further  information  will  also  be  found 
in  the  selection  from  the  Red  Book  of  Westmarch  that  has 
already  been  published,  under  the  title  of  The  Hobbit.  That 
story  was  derived  from  the  earlier  chapters  of  the  Red  Book, 
composed  by  Bilbo  himself,  the  first  Hobbit  to  become 
famous  in  the  world  at  large,  and  called  by  him  There  and 
Back  Again ,  since  they  told  of  his  journey  into  the  East  and 
his  return:  an  adventure  which  later  involved  all  the  Hobbits 
in  the  great  events  of  that  Age  that  are  here  related. 

Many,  however,  may  wish  to  know  more  about  this  re¬ 
markable  people  from  the  outset,  while  some  may  not  possess 
the  earlier  book.  For  such  readers  a  few  notes  on  the  more 
important  points  are  here  collected  from  Hobbit-lore,  and 
the  first  adventure  is  briefly  recalled. 

Hobbits  are  an  unobtrusive  but  very  ancient  people,  more 
numerous  formerly  than  they  are  today;  for  they  love  peace 
and  quiet  and  good  tilled  earth:  a  well-ordered  and  well- 
farmed  countryside  was  their  favourite  haunt.  They  do  not 
and  did  not  understand  or  like  machines  more  complicated 
than  a  forge-bellows,  a  water-mill,  or  a  hand-loom,  though 
they  were  skilful  with  tools.  Even  in  ancient  days  they 
were,  as  a  rule,  shy  of  ‘the  Big  Folk’,  as  they  call  us,  and 
now  they  avoid  us  with  dismay  and  are  becoming  hard  to 
find.  They  are  quick  of  hearing  and  sharp-eyed,  and  though 
they  are  inclined  to  be  fat  and  do  not  hurry  unnecessarily,  they 
are  nonetheless  nimble  and  deft  in  their  movements.  They 


2 


PROLOGUE 


possessed  from  the  first  the  art  of  disappearing  swiftly  and 
silently,  when  large  folk  whom  they  do  not  wish  to  meet  come 
blundering  by;  and  this  art  they  have  developed  until  to  Men 
it  may  seem  magical.  But  Hobbits  have  never,  in  fact,  studied 
magic  of  any  kind,  and  their  elusiveness  is  due  solely  to 
a  professional  skill  that  heredity  and  practice,  and  a  close 
friendship  with  the  earth,  have  rendered  inimitable  by  bigger 
and  clumsier  races. 

For  they  are  a  little  people,  smaller  than  Dwarves:  less  stout 
and  stocky,  that  is,  even  when  they  are  not  actually  much 
shorter.  Their  height  is  variable,  ranging  between  two  and 
four  feet  of  our  measure.  They  seldom  now  reach  three  feet; 
but  they  have  dwindled,  they  say,  and  in  ancient  days  they 
were  taller.  According  to  the  Red  Book,  Bandobras  Took 
(Bullroarer),  son  of  Isumbras  the  Third,  was  four  foot  five 
and  able  to  ride  a  horse.  He  was  surpassed  in  all  Hobbit 
records  only  by  two  famous  characters  of  old;  but  that  curious 
matter  is  dealt  with  in  this  book. 

As  for  the  Hobbits  of  the  Shire,  with  whom  these  tales  are 
concerned,  in  the  days  of  their  peace  and  prosperity  they 
were  a  merry  folk.  They  dressed  in  bright  colours,  being 
notably  fond  of  yellow  and  green;  but  they  seldom  wore 
shoes,  since  their  feet  had  tough  leathery  soles  and  were  clad 
in  a  thick  curling  hair,  much  like  the  hair  of  their  heads,  which 
was  commonly  brown.  Thus,  the  only  craft  little  practised 
among  them  was  shoe-making;  but  they  had  long  and  skilful 
fingers  and  could  make  many  other  useful  and  comely  things. 
Their  faces  were  as  a  rule  good-natured  rather  than  beau¬ 
tiful,  broad,  bright-eyed,  red-cheeked,  with  mouths  apt  to 
laughter,  and  to  eating  and  drinking.  And  laugh  they  did,  and 
eat,  and  drink,  often  and  heartily,  being  fond  of  simple  jests 
at  all  times,  and  of  six  meals  a  day  (when  they  could  get 
them) .  They  were  hospitable  and  delighted  in  parties,  and  in 
presents,  which  they  gave  away  freely  and  eagerly  accepted. 

It  is  plain  indeed  that  in  spite  of  later  estrangement  Hobbits 
are  relatives  of  ours:  far  nearer  to  us  than  Elves,  or  even  than 
Dwarves.  Of  old  they  spoke  the  languages  of  Men,  after  their 


PROLOGUE 


3 


own  fashion,  and  liked  and  disliked  much  the  same  things  as 
Men  did.  But  what  exactly  our  relationship  is  can  no  longer 
be  discovered.  The  beginning  of  Hobbits  lies  far  back  in  the 
Elder  Days  that  are  now  lost  and  forgotten.  Only  the  Elves 
still  preserve  any  records  of  that  vanished  time,  and  their 
traditions  are  concerned  almost  entirely  with  their  own  his¬ 
tory,  in  which  Men  appear  seldom  and  Hobbits  are  not  men¬ 
tioned  at  all.  Yet  it  is  clear  that  Hobbits  had,  in  fact,  lived 
quietly  in  Middle-earth  for  many  long  years  before  other  folk 
became  even  aware  of  them.  And  the  world  being  after  all 
full  of  strange  creatures  beyond  count,  these  little  people 
seemed  of  very  little  importance.  But  in  the  days  of  Bilbo, 
and  of  Frodo  his  heir,  they  suddenly  became,  by  no  wish  of 
their  own,  both  important  and  renowned,  and  troubled  the 
counsels  of  the  Wise  and  the  Great. 

Those  days,  the  Third  Age  of  Middle-earth,  are  now  long 
past,  and  the  shape  of  all  lands  has  been  changed;  but  the 
regions  in  which  Hobbits  then  lived  were  doubtless  the  same 
as  those  in  which  they  still  linger:  the  North-West  of  the  Old 
World,  east  of  the  Sea.  Of  their  original  home  the  Hobbits 
in  Bilbo’s  time  preserved  no  knowledge.  A  love  of  learning 
(other  than  genealogical  lore)  was  far  from  general  among 
them,  but  there  remained  still  a  few  in  the  older  families  who 
studied  their  own  books,  and  even  gathered  reports  of  old 
times  and  distant  lands  from  Elves,  Dwarves,  and  Men.  Their 
own  records  began  only  after  the  settlement  of  the  Shire,  and 
their  most  ancient  legends  hardly  looked  further  back  than 
their  Wandering  Days.  It  is  clear,  nonetheless,  from  these 
legends,  and  from  the  evidence  of  their  peculiar  words  and 
customs,  that  like  many  other  folk  Hobbits  had  in  the  distant 
past  moved  westward.  Their  earliest  tales  seem  to  glimpse  a 
time  when  they  dwelt  in  the  upper  vales  of  Anduin,  between 
the  eaves  of  Greenwood  the  Great  and  the  Misty  Mountains. 
Why  they  later  undertook  the  hard  and  perilous  crossing  of 
the  mountains  into  Eriador  is  no  longer  certain.  Their  own 
accounts  speak  of  the  multiplying  of  Men  in  the  land,  and  of 


4 


PROLOGUE 


a  shadow  that  fell  on  the  forest,  so  that  it  became  darkened 
and  its  new  name  was  Mirkwood. 

Before  the  crossing  of  the  mountains  the  Hobbits  had 
already  become  divided  into  three  somewhat  different  breeds: 
Harfoots,  Stoors,  and  Fallohides.  The  Harfoots  were  browner 
of  skin,  smaller,  and  shorter,  and  they  were  beardless  and 
bootless;  their  hands  and  feet  were  neat  and  nimble;  and  they 
preferred  highlands  and  hillsides.  The  Stoors  were  broader, 
heavier  in  build;  their  feet  and  hands  were  larger;  and  they 
preferred  flat  lands  and  riversides.  The  Fallohides  were  fairer 
of  skin  and  also  of  hair,  and  they  were  taller  and  slimmer 
than  the  others;  they  were  lovers  of  trees  and  of  woodlands. 

The  Harfoots  had  much  to  do  with  Dwarves  in  ancient 
times,  and  long  lived  in  the  foothills  of  the  mountains.  They 
moved  westward  early,  and  roamed  over  Eriador  as  far  as 
Weathertop  while  the  others  were  still  in  Wilderland.  They 
were  the  most  normal  and  representative  variety  of  Hobbit, 
and  far  the  most  numerous.  They  were  the  most  inclined  to 
settle  in  one  place,  and  longest  preserved  their  ancestral  habit 
of  living  in  tunnels  and  holes. 

The  Stoors  lingered  long  by  the  banks  of  the  Great  River 
Anduin,  and  were  less  shy  of  Men.  They  came  west  after  the 
Harfoots  and  followed  the  course  of  the  Loudwater  south¬ 
wards;  and  there  many  of  them  long  dwelt  between  Tharbad 
and  the  borders  of  Dunland  before  they  moved  north  again. 

The  Fallohides,  the  least  numerous,  were  a  northerly 
branch.  They  were  more  friendly  with  Elves  than  the  other 
Hobbits  were,  and  had  more  skill  in  language  and  song  than 
in  handicrafts;  and  of  old  they  preferred  hunting  to  tilling. 
They  crossed  the  mountains  north  of  Rivendell  and  came 
down  the  River  Hoarwell.  In  Eriador  they  soon  mingled  with 
the  other  kinds  that  had  preceded  them,  but  being  somewhat 
bolder  and  more  adventurous,  they  were  often  found  as 
leaders  or  chieftains  among  clans  of  Harfoots  or  Stoors.  Even 
in  Bilbo’s  time  the  strong  Fallohidish  strain  could  still  be 
noted  among  the  greater  families,  such  as  the  Tooks  and  the 
Masters  of  Buckland. 


PROLOGUE 


5 


In  the  westlands  of  Eriador,  between  the  Misty  Mountains 
and  the  Mountains  of  Lune,  the  Hobbits  found  both  Men  and 
Elves.  Indeed,  a  remnant  still  dwelt  there  of  the  Dunedain,  the 
kings  of  Men  that  came  over  the  Sea  out  of  Westernesse;  but 
they  were  dwindling  fast  and  the  lands  of  their  North  King¬ 
dom  were  falling  far  and  wide  into  waste.  There  was  room 
and  to  spare  for  incomers,  and  ere  long  the  Hobbits  began 
to  settle  in  ordered  communities.  Most  of  their  earlier  settle¬ 
ments  had  long  disappeared  and  been  forgotten  in  Bilbo’s 
time;  but  one  of  the  first  to  become  important  still  endured, 
though  reduced  in  size;  this  was  at  Bree  and  in  the  Chetwood 
that  lay  round  about,  some  forty  miles  east  of  the  Shire. 

It  was  in  these  early  days,  doubtless,  that  the  Hobbits 
learned  their  letters  and  began  to  write  after  the  manner  of 
the  Dunedain,  who  had  in  their  turn  long  before  learned  the 
art  from  the  Elves.  And  in  those  days  also  they  forgot  what¬ 
ever  languages  they  had  used  before,  and  spoke  ever  after  the 
Common  Speech,  the  Westron  as  it  was  named,  that  was 
current  through  all  the  lands  of  the  kings  from  Arnor  to 
Gondor,  and  about  all  the  coasts  of  the  Sea  from  Belfalas  to 
Lune.  Yet  they  kept  a  few  words  of  their  own,  as  well  as  their 
own  names  of  months  and  days,  and  a  great  store  of  personal 
names  out  of  the  past. 

About  this  time  legend  among  the  Hobbits  first  becomes 
history  with  a  reckoning  of  years.  For  it  was  in  the  one  thou¬ 
sand  six  hundred  and  first  year  of  the  Third  Age  that  the 
Fallohide  brothers,  Marcho  and  Blanco,  set  out  from  Bree; 
and  having  obtained  permission  from  the  high  king  at 
Fornost,*  they  crossed  the  brown  river  Baranduin  with  a 
great  following  of  Hobbits.  They  passed  over  the  Bridge  of 
Stonebows,  that  had  been  built  in  the  days  of  the  power  of 
the  North  Kingdom,  and  they  took  all  the  land  beyond  to 
dwell  in,  between  the  river  and  the  Far  Downs.  All  that  was 


*  As  the  records  of  Gondor  relate  this  was  Argeleb  II,  the  twentieth 
of  the  Northern  line,  which  came  to  an  end  with  Arvedui  three  hundred 
years  later. 


6 


PROLOGUE 


demanded  of  them  was  that  they  should  keep  the  Great 
Bridge  in  repair,  and  all  other  bridges  and  roads,  speed  the 
king’s  messengers,  and  acknowledge  his  lordship. 

Thus  began  the  Shire-reckoning ,  for  the  year  of  the  crossing 
of  the  Brandywine  (as  the  Hobbits  turned  the  name)  became 
Year  One  of  the  Shire,  and  all  later  dates  were  reckoned  from 
it.*  At  once  the  western  Hobbits  fell  in  love  with  their  new 
land,  and  they  remained  there,  and  soon  passed  once  more 
out  of  the  history  of  Men  and  of  Elves.  While  there  was  still 
a  king  they  were  in  name  his  subjects,  but  they  were,  in  fact, 
ruled  by  their  own  chieftains  and  meddled  not  at  all  with 
events  in  the  world  outside.  To  the  last  battle  at  Fornost  with 
the  Witch-lord  of  Angmar  they  sent  some  bowmen  to  the  aid 
of  the  king,  or  so  they  maintained,  though  no  tales  of  Men 
record  it.  But  in  that  war  the  North  Kingdom  ended;  and 
then  the  Hobbits  took  the  land  for  their  own,  and  they  chose 
from  their  own  chiefs  a  Thain  to  hold  the  authority  of  the 
king  that  was  gone.  There  for  a  thousand  years  they  were 
little  troubled  by  wars,  and  they  prospered  and  multiplied 
after  the  Dark  Plague  (S.R.  37)  until  the  disaster  of  the  Long 
Winter  and  the  famine  that  followed  it.  Many  thousands  then 
perished,  but  the  Days  of  Dearth  (1158-60)  were  at  the  time 
of  this  tale  long  past  and  the  Hobbits  had  again  become 
accustomed  to  plenty.  The  land  was  rich  and  kindly,  and 
though  it  had  long  been  deserted  when  they  entered  it,  it  had 
before  been  well  tilled,  and  there  the  king  had  once  had  many 
farms,  cornlands,  vineyards,  and  woods. 

Forty  leagues  it  stretched  from  the  Far  Downs  to  the 
Brandywine  Bridge,  and  fifty  from  the  northern  moors  to 
the  marshes  in  the  south.  The  Hobbits  named  it  the  Shire, 
as  the  region  of  the  authority  of  their  Thain,  and  a  district 
of  well-ordered  business;  and  there  in  that  pleasant  corner  of 
the  world  they  plied  their  well-ordered  business  of  living,  and 


*  Thus,  the  years  of  the  Third  Age  in  the  reckoning  of  the  Elves  and 
the  Dunedain  may  be  found  by  adding  1600  to  the  dates  of  Shire¬ 
reckoning. 


PROLOGUE 


7 


they  heeded  less  and  less  the  world  outside  where  dark  things 
moved,  until  they  came  to  think  that  peace  and  plenty  were 
the  rule  in  Middle-earth  and  the  right  of  all  sensible  folk. 
They  forgot  or  ignored  what  little  they  had  ever  known  of 
the  Guardians,  and  of  the  labours  of  those  that  made  possible 
the  long  peace  of  the  Shire.  They  were,  in  fact,  sheltered,  but 
they  had  ceased  to  remember  it. 

At  no  time  had  Hobbits  of  any  kind  been  warlike,  and  they 
had  never  fought  among  themselves.  In  olden  days  they  had, 
of  course,  been  often  obliged  to  fight  to  maintain  themselves 
in  a  hard  world;  but  in  Bilbo’s  time  that  was  very  ancient 
history.  The  last  battle,  before  this  story  opens,  and  indeed 
the  only  one  that  had  ever  been  fought  within  the  borders 
of  the  Shire,  was  beyond  living  memory:  the  Battle  of 
Greenfields,  S.R.  1147,  in  which  Bandobras  Took  routed  an 
invasion  of  Ores.  Even  the  weathers  had  grown  milder,  and 
the  wolves  that  had  once  come  ravening  out  of  the  North  in 
bitter  white  winters  were  now  only  a  grandfather’s  tale.  So, 
though  there  was  still  some  store  of  weapons  in  the  Shire, 
these  were  used  mostly  as  trophies,  hanging  above  hearths  or 
on  walls,  or  gathered  into  the  museum  at  Michel  Delving. 
The  Mathom-house  it  was  called;  for  anything  that  Hobbits 
had  no  immediate  use  for,  but  were  unwilling  to  throw  away, 
they  called  a  mathom.  Their  dwellings  were  apt  to  become 
rather  crowded  with  mathoms,  and  many  of  the  presents  that 
passed  from  hand  to  hand  were  of  that  sort. 

Nonetheless,  ease  and  peace  had  left  this  people  still  curi¬ 
ously  tough.  They  were,  if  it  came  to  it,  difficult  to  daunt  or 
to  kill;  and  they  were,  perhaps,  so  unwearyingly  fond  of  good 
things  not  least  because  they  could,  when  put  to  it,  do  without 
them,  and  could  survive  rough  handling  by  grief,  foe,  or 
weather  in  a  way  that  astonished  those  who  did  not  know 
them  well  and  looked  no  further  than  their  bellies  and  their 
well-fed  faces.  Though  slow  to  quarrel,  and  for  sport  killing 
nothing  that  lived,  they  were  doughty  at  bay,  and  at  need 
could  still  handle  arms.  They  shot  well  with  the  bow,  for  they 
were  keen-eyed  and  sure  at  the  mark.  Not  only  with  bows  and 


PROLOGUE 


arrows.  If  any  Hobbit  stooped  for  a  stone,  it  was  well  to  get 
quickly  under  cover,  as  all  trespassing  beasts  knew  very  well. 

All  Hobbits  had  originally  lived  in  holes  in  the  ground,  or 
so  they  believed,  and  in  such  dwellings  they  still  felt  most  at 
home;  but  in  the  course  of  time  they  had  been  obliged  to 
adopt  other  forms  of  abode.  Actually  in  the  Shire  in  Bilbo’s 
days  it  was,  as  a  rule,  only  the  richest  and  the  poorest  Hobbits 
that  maintained  the  old  custom.  The  poorest  went  on  living 
in  burrows  of  the  most  primitive  kind,  mere  holes  indeed, 
with  only  one  window  or  none;  while  the  well-to-do  still 
constructed  more  luxurious  versions  of  the  simple  diggings 
of  old.  But  suitable  sites  for  these  large  and  ramifying  tunnels 
(or  smials  as  they  called  them)  were  not  everywhere  to  be 
found;  and  in  the  flats  and  the  low-lying  districts  the  Hobbits, 
as  they  multiplied,  began  to  build  above  ground.  Indeed,  even 
in  the  hilly  regions  and  the  older  villages,  such  as  Hobbiton 
or  Tuckborough,  or  in  the  chief  township  of  the  Shire,  Michel 
Delving  on  the  White  Downs,  there  were  now  many  houses 
of  wood,  brick,  or  stone.  These  were  specially  favoured  by 
millers,  smiths,  ropers,  and  Cartwrights,  and  others  of  that 
sort;  for  even  when  they  had  holes  to  live  in,  Hobbits  had 
long  been  accustomed  to  build  sheds  and  workshops. 

The  habit  of  building  farmhouses  and  barns  was  said  to 
have  begun  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  Marish  down  by 
the  Brandywine.  The  Hobbits  of  that  quarter,  the  East¬ 
farthing,  were  rather  large  and  heavy-legged,  and  they  wore 
dwarf-boots  in  muddy  weather.  But  they  were  well  known  to 
be  Stoors  in  a  large  part  of  their  blood,  as  indeed  was  shown 
by  the  down  that  many  grew  on  their  chins.  No  Harfoot  or 
Fallohide  had  any  trace  of  a  beard.  Indeed,  the  folk  of  the 
Marish,  and  of  Buckland,  east  of  the  River,  which  they  after¬ 
wards  occupied,  came  for  the  most  part  later  into  the  Shire 
up  from  south-away;  and  they  still  had  many  peculiar  names 
and  strange  words  not  found  elsewhere  in  the  Shire. 

It  is  probable  that  the  craft  of  building,  as  many  other  crafts 
beside,  was  derived  from  the  Dunedain.  But  the  Hobbits  may 
have  learned  it  direct  from  the  Elves,  the  teachers  of  Men  in 


PROLOGUE 


9 


their  youth.  For  the  Elves  of  the  High  Kindred  had  not  yet 
forsaken  Middle-earth,  and  they  dwelt  still  at  that  time  at  the 
Grey  Havens  away  to  the  west,  and  in  other  places  within 
reach  of  the  Shire.  Three  Elf- towers  of  immemorial  age  were 
still  to  be  seen  on  the  Tower  Hills  beyond  the  western 
marches.  They  shone  far  off  in  the  moonlight.  The  tallest 
was  furthest  away,  standing  alone  upon  a  green  mound.  The 
Hobbits  of  the  Westfarthing  said  that  one  could  see  the  Sea 
from  the  top  of  that  tower;  but  no  Hobbit  had  ever  been 
known  to  climb  it.  Indeed,  few  Hobbits  had  ever  seen  or 
sailed  upon  the  Sea,  and  fewer  still  had  ever  returned  to 
report  it.  Most  Hobbits  regarded  even  rivers  and  small  boats 
with  deep  misgivings,  and  not  many  of  them  could  swim. 
And  as  the  days  of  the  Shire  lengthened  they  spoke  less  and 
less  with  the  Elves,  and  grew  afraid  of  them,  and  distrustful 
of  those  that  had  dealings  with  them;  and  the  Sea  became  a 
word  of  fear  among  them,  and  a  token  of  death,  and  they 
turned  their  faces  away  from  the  hills  in  the  west. 

The  craft  of  building  may  have  come  from  Elves  or  Men, 
but  the  Hobbits  used  it  in  their  own  fashion.  They  did  not 
go  in  for  towers.  Their  houses  were  usually  long,  low,  and 
comfortable.  The  oldest  kind  were,  indeed,  no  more  than 
built  imitations  of  smials ,  thatched  with  dry  grass  or  straw,  or 
roofed  with  turves,  and  having  walls  somewhat  bulged.  That 
stage,  however,  belonged  to  the  early  days  of  the  Shire,  and 
hobbit-building  had  long  since  been  altered,  improved  by 
devices,  learned  from  Dwarves,  or  discovered  by  themselves. 
A  preference  for  round  windows,  and  even  round  doors,  was 
the  chief  remaining  peculiarity  of  hobbit-architecture. 

The  houses  and  the  holes  of  Shire-hobbits  were  often  large, 
and  inhabited  by  large  families.  (Bilbo  and  Frodo  Baggins 
were  as  bachelors  very  exceptional,  as  they  were  also  in  many 
other  ways,  such  as  their  friendship  with  the  Elves.)  Some¬ 
times,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Tooks  of  Great  Smials,  or  the 
Brandybucks  of  Brandy  Hall,  many  generations  of  relatives 
lived  in  (comparative)  peace  together  in  one  ancestral  and 
many-tunnelled  mansion.  All  Hobbits  were,  in  any  case, 


IO 


PROLOGUE 


clannish  and  reckoned  up  their  relationships  with  great  care. 
They  drew  long  and  elaborate  family-trees  with  innumerable 
branches.  In  dealing  with  Hobbits  it  is  important  to  remember 
who  is  related  to  whom,  and  in  what  degree.  It  would  be 
impossible  in  this  book  to  set  out  a  family-tree  that  included 
even  the  more  important  members  of  the  more  important 
families  at  the  time  which  these  tales  tell  of.  The  genealogical 
trees  at  the  end  of  the  Red  Book  of  Westmarch  are  a  small 
book  in  themselves,  and  all  but  Hobbits  would  find  them 
exceedingly  dull.  Hobbits  delighted  in  such  things,  if  they  were 
accurate:  they  liked  to  have  books  filled  with  things  that  they 
already  knew,  set  out  fair  and  square  with  no  contradictions. 


2 

Concerning  Pipe-weed 

There  is  another  astonishing  thing  about  Hobbits  of  old  that 
must  be  mentioned,  an  astonishing  habit:  they  imbibed  or 
inhaled,  through  pipes  of  clay  or  wood,  the  smoke  of  the 
burning  leaves  of  a  herb,  which  they  called  pipe-weed  or  leaf, 
a  variety  probably  of  Nicotiana.  A  great  deal  of  mystery 
surrounds  the  origin  of  this  peculiar  custom,  or  ‘art’  as  the 
Hobbits  preferred  to  call  it.  All  that  could  be  discovered  about 
it  in  antiquity  was  put  together  by  Meriadoc  Brandybuck 
(later  Master  of  Buckland),  and  since  he  and  the  tobacco  of 
the  Southfarthing  play  a  part  in  the  history  that  follows,  his 
remarks  in  the  introduction  to  his  Herblore  of  the  Shire  may 
be  quoted. 

‘This,’  he  says,  ‘is  the  one  art  that  we  can  certainly  claim 
to  be  our  own  invention.  When  Hobbits  first  began  to  smoke 
is  not  known,  all  the  legends  and  family  histories  take  it  for 
granted;  for  ages  folk  in  the  Shire  smoked  various  herbs,  some 
fouler,  some  sweeter.  But  all  accounts  agree  that  Tobold 
Hornblower  of  Longbottom  in  the  Southfarthing  first  grew 
the  true  pipe-weed  in  his  gardens  in  the  days  of  Isengrim  the 
Second,  about  the  year  1070  of  Shire -reckoning.  The  best 


PROLOGUE 


II 


home-grown  still  comes  from  that  district,  especially  the 
varieties  now  known  as  Longbottom  Leaf,  Old  Toby,  and 
Southern  Star. 

‘How  Old  Toby  came  by  the  plant  is  not  recorded,  for  to 
his  dying  day  he  would  not  tell.  He  knew  much  about  herbs, 
but  he  was  no  traveller.  It  is  said  that  in  his  youth  he  went 
often  to  Bree,  though  he  certainly  never  went  further  from 
the  Shire  than  that.  It  is  thus  quite  possible  that  he  learned 
of  this  plant  in  Bree,  where  now,  at  any  rate,  it  grows  well  on 
the  south  slopes  of  the  hill.  The  Bree-hobbits  claim  to  have 
been  the  first  actual  smokers  of  the  pipe-weed.  They  claim, 
of  course,  to  have  done  everything  before  the  people  of  the 
Shire,  whom  they  refer  to  as  “colonists”;  but  in  this  case  their 
claim  is,  I  think,  likely  to  be  true.  And  certainly  it  was  from 
Bree  that  the  art  of  smoking  the  genuine  weed  spread  in 
the  recent  centuries  among  Dwarves  and  such  other  folk, 
Rangers,  Wizards,  or  wanderers,  as  still  passed  to  and  fro 
through  that  ancient  road-meeting.  The  home  and  centre  of 
the  art  is  thus  to  be  found  in  the  old  inn  of  Bree,  The  Prancing 
Pony,  that  has  been  kept  by  the  family  of  Butterbur  from 
time  beyond  record. 

‘All  the  same,  observations  that  I  have  made  on  my  own 
many  journeys  south  have  convinced  me  that  the  weed  itself 
is  not  native  to  our  parts  of  the  world,  but  came  northward 
from  the  lower  Anduin,  whither  it  was,  I  suspect,  originally 
brought  over  Sea  by  the  Men  of  Westernesse.  It  grows  abund¬ 
antly  in  Gondor,  and  there  is  richer  and  larger  than  in  the 
North,  where  it  is  never  found  wild,  and  flourishes  only  in 
warm  sheltered  places  like  Longbottom.  The  Men  of  Gondor 
call  it  sweet  galenas,  and  esteem  it  only  for  the  fragrance  of  its 
flowers.  From  that  land  it  must  have  been  carried  up  the 
Greenway  during  the  long  centuries  between  the  coming  of 
Elendil  and  our  own  days.  But  even  the  Dunedain  of  Gondor 
allow  us  this  credit:  Hobbits  first  put  it  into  pipes.  Not  even 
the  Wizards  first  thought  of  that  before  we  did.  Though  one 
Wizard  that  I  knew  took  up  the  art  long  ago,  and  became  as 
skilful  in  it  as  in  all  other  things  that  he  put  his  mind  to.’ 


12 


PROLOGUE 


3 

Of  the  Ordering  of  the  Shire 

The  Shire  was  divided  into  four  quarters,  the  Farthings 
already  referred  to,  North,  South,  East,  and  West;  and  these 
again  each  into  a  number  of  folklands,  which  still  bore  the 
names  of  some  of  the  old  leading  families,  although  by  the 
time  of  this  history  these  names  were  no  longer  found  only 
in  their  proper  folklands.  Nearly  all  Tooks  still  lived  in  the 
Tookland,  but  that  was  not  true  of  many  other  families,  such 
as  the  Bagginses  or  the  Boffins.  Outside  the  Farthings  were 
the  East  and  West  Marches:  the  Buckland  (p.  129);  and  the 
Westmarch  added  to  the  Shire  in  S.R.  1452. 

The  Shire  at  this  time  had  hardly  any  ‘government’. 
Families  for  the  most  part  managed  their  own  affairs.  Grow¬ 
ing  food  and  eating  it  occupied  most  of  their  time.  In 
other  matters  they  were,  as  a  rule,  generous  and  not  greedy, 
but  contented  and  moderate,  so  that  estates,  farms,  work¬ 
shops,  and  small  trades  tended  to  remain  unchanged  for 
generations. 

There  remained,  of  course,  the  ancient  tradition  concern¬ 
ing  the  high  king  at  Fornost,  or  Norbury  as  they  called  it, 
away  north  of  the  Shire.  But  there  had  been  no  king  for  nearly 
a  thousand  years,  and  even  the  ruins  of  Kings’  Norbury  were 
covered  with  grass.  Yet  the  Hobbits  still  said  of  wild  folk  and 
wicked  things  (such  as  trolls)  that  they  had  not  heard  of  the 
king.  For  they  attributed  to  the  king  of  old  all  their  essential 
laws;  and  usually  they  kept  the  laws  of  free  will,  because  they 
were  The  Rules  (as  they  said),  both  ancient  and  just. 

It  is  true  that  the  Took  family  had  long  been  pre-eminent; 
for  the  office  of  Thain  had  passed  to  them  (from  the  Old- 
bucks)  some  centuries  before,  and  the  chief  Took  had  borne 
that  title  ever  since.  The  Thain  was  the  master  of  the  Shire- 
moot,  and  captain  of  the  Shire-muster  and  the  Hobbitry-in- 
arms;  but  as  muster  and  moot  were  only  held  in  times  of 
emergency,  which  no  longer  occurred,  the  Thainship  had 
ceased  to  be  more  than  a  nominal  dignity.  The  Took  family 


PROLOGUE 


13 


was  still,  indeed,  accorded  a  special  respect,  for  it  remained 
both  numerous  and  exceedingly  wealthy,  and  was  liable  to 
produce  in  every  generation  strong  characters  of  peculiar 
habits  and  even  adventurous  temperament.  The  latter  quali¬ 
ties,  however,  were  now  rather  tolerated  (in  the  rich)  than 
generally  approved.  The  custom  endured,  nonetheless,  of 
referring  to  the  head  of  the  family  as  The  Took,  and  of 
adding  to  his  name,  if  required,  a  number:  such  as  Isengrim 
the  Second,  for  instance. 

The  only  real  official  in  the  Shire  at  this  date  was  the  Mayor 
of  Michel  Delving  (or  of  the  Shire),  who  was  elected  every 
seven  years  at  the  Free  Fair  on  the  White  Downs  at  the  Lithe, 
that  is  at  Midsummer.  As  mayor  almost  his  only  duty  was 
to  preside  at  banquets,  given  on  the  Shire-holidays,  which 
occurred  at  frequent  intervals.  But  the  offices  of  Postmaster 
and  First  Shirriff  were  attached  to  the  mayoralty,  so  that  he 
managed  both  the  Messenger  Service  and  the  Watch.  These 
were  the  only  Shire-services,  and  the  Messengers  were  the 
most  numerous,  and  much  the  busier  of  the  two.  By  no 
means  all  Hobbits  were  lettered,  but  those  who  were  wrote 
constantly  to  all  their  friends  (and  a  selection  of  their 
relations)  who  lived  further  off  than  an  afternoon’s  walk. 

The  Shirriffs  was  the  name  that  the  Hobbits  gave  to  their 
police,  or  the  nearest  equivalent  that  they  possessed.  They 
had,  of  course,  no  uniforms  (such  things  being  quite  un¬ 
known),  only  a  feather  in  their  caps;  and  they  were  in  practice 
rather  haywards  than  policemen,  more  concerned  with  the 
strayings  of  beasts  than  of  people.  There  were  in  all  the  Shire 
only  twelve  of  them,  three  in  each  Farthing,  for  Inside  Work. 
A  rather  larger  body,  varying  at  need,  was  employed  to  ‘beat 
the  bounds’,  and  to  see  that  Outsiders  of  any  land,  great  or 
small,  did  not  make  themselves  a  nuisance. 

At  the  time  when  this  story  begins  the  Bounders,  as  they 
were  called,  had  been  greatly  increased.  There  were  many 
reports  and  complaints  of  strange  persons  and  creatures 
prowling  about  the  borders,  or  over  them:  the  first  sign  that 
all  was  not  quite  as  it  should  be,  and  always  had  been  except 


14 


PROLOGUE 


in  tales  and  legends  of  long  ago.  Few  heeded  the  sign,  and 
not  even  Bilbo  yet  had  any  notion  of  what  it  portended.  Sixty 
years  had  passed  since  he  set  out  on  his  memorable  journey, 
and  he  was  old  even  for  Hobbits,  who  reached  a  hundred 
as  often  as  not;  but  much  evidently  still  remained  of  the 
considerable  wealth  that  he  had  brought  back.  How  much  or 
how  little  he  revealed  to  no  one,  not  even  to  Frodo  his  favour¬ 
ite  ‘nephew’.  And  he  still  kept  secret  the  ring  that  he  had 
found. 


4 

Of  the  Finding  of  the  Ring 

As  is  told  in  The  Hobbit,  there  came  one  day  to  Bilbo’s  door  the 
great  Wizard,  Gandalf  the  Grey,  and  thirteen  dwarves  with 
him:  none  other,  indeed,  than  Thorin  Oakenshield,  descend¬ 
ant  of  kings,  and  his  twelve  companions  in  exile.  With  them 
he  set  out,  to  his  own  lasting  astonishment,  on  a  morning  of 
April,  it  being  then  the  year  1341  Shire -reckoning,  on  a  quest 
of  great  treasure,  the  dwarf-hoards  of  the  Kings  under  the 
Mountain,  beneath  Erebor  in  Dale,  far  off  in  the  East.  The 
quest  was  successful,  and  the  Dragon  that  guarded  the  hoard 
was  destroyed.  Yet,  though  before  all  was  won  the  Battle  of 
Five  Armies  was  fought,  and  Thorin  was  slain,  and  many 
deeds  of  renown  were  done,  the  matter  would  scarcely  have 
concerned  later  history,  or  earned  more  than  a  note  in 
the  long  annals  of  the  Third  Age,  but  for  an  ‘accident’  by  the 
way.  The  party  was  assailed  by  Ores  in  a  high  pass  of  the 
Misty  Mountains  as  they  went  towards  Wilderland;  and  so  it 
happened  that  Bilbo  was  lost  for  a  while  in  the  black  ore- 
mines  deep  under  the  mountains,  and  there,  as  he  groped  in 
vain  in  the  dark,  he  put  his  hand  on  a  ring,  lying  on  the  floor 
of  a  tunnel.  He  put  it  in  his  pocket.  It  seemed  then  like  mere 
luck. 

Trying  to  find  his  way  out,  Bilbo  went  on  down  to  the 
roots  of  the  mountains,  until  he  could  go  no  further.  At  the 


PROLOGUE 


15 


bottom  of  the  tunnel  lay  a  cold  lake  far  from  the  light,  and 
on  an  island  of  rock  in  the  water  lived  Gollum.  He  was  a 
loathsome  little  creature:  he  paddled  a  small  boat  with  his 
large  flat  feet,  peering  with  pale  luminous  eyes  and  catching 
blind  fish  with  his  long  fingers,  and  eating  them  raw.  He  ate 
any  living  thing,  even  ore,  if  he  could  catch  it  and  strangle  it 
without  a  struggle.  He  possessed  a  secret  treasure  that  had 
come  to  him  long  ages  ago,  when  he  still  lived  in  the  light:  a 
ring  of  gold  that  made  its  wearer  invisible.  It  was  the  one 
thing  he  loved,  his  ‘Precious’,  and  he  talked  to  it,  even  when 
it  was  not  with  him.  For  he  kept  it  hidden  safe  in  a  hole  on 
his  island,  except  when  he  was  hunting  or  spying  on  the  ores 
of  the  mines. 

Maybe  he  would  have  attacked  Bilbo  at  once,  if  the  ring 
had  been  on  him  when  they  met;  but  it  was  not,  and  the 
hobbit  held  in  his  hand  an  Elvish  knife,  which  served  him  as 
a  sword.  So  to  gain  time  Gollum  challenged  Bilbo  to  the 
Riddle -game,  saying  that  if  he  asked  a  riddle  which  Bilbo 
could  not  guess,  then  he  would  kill  him  and  eat  him;  but  if 
Bilbo  defeated  him,  then  he  would  do  as  Bilbo  wished:  he 
would  lead  him  to  a  way  out  of  the  tunnels. 

Since  he  was  lost  in  the  dark  without  hope,  and  could 
neither  go  on  nor  back,  Bilbo  accepted  the  challenge;  and 
they  asked  one  another  many  riddles.  In  the  end  Bilbo  won 
the  game,  more  by  luck  (as  it  seemed)  than  by  wits;  for  he 
was  stumped  at  last  for  a  riddle  to  ask,  and  cried  out,  as  his 
hand  came  upon  the  ring  he  had  picked  up  and  forgotten: 
What  have  I  got  in  my  pocket?  This  Gollum  failed  to  answer, 
though  he  demanded  three  guesses. 

The  Authorities,  it  is  true,  differ  whether  this  last  question 
was  a  mere  ‘question’  and  not  a  ‘riddle’  according  to  the  strict 
rules  of  the  Game;  but  all  agree  that,  after  accepting  it  and 
trying  to  guess  the  answer,  Gollum  was  bound  by  his 
promise.  And  Bilbo  pressed  him  to  keep  his  word;  for  the 
thought  came  to  him  that  this  slimy  creature  might  prove 
false,  even  though  such  promises  were  held  sacred,  and  of 
old  all  but  the  wickedest  things  feared  to  break  them.  But 


i6 


PROLOGUE 


after  ages  alone  in  the  dark  Gollum’s  heart  was  black,  and 
treachery  was  in  it.  He  slipped  away,  and  returned  to  his 
island,  of  which  Bilbo  knew  nothing,  not  far  off  in  the  dark 
water.  There,  he  thought,  lay  his  ring.  He  was  hungry  now, 
and  angry,  and  once  his  ‘Precious’  was  with  him  he  would 
not  fear  any  weapon  at  all. 

But  the  ring  was  not  on  the  island;  he  had  lost  it,  it  was 
gone.  His  screech  sent  a  shiver  down  Bilbo’s  back,  though  he 
did  not  yet  understand  what  had  happened.  But  Gollum  had 
at  last  leaped  to  a  guess,  too  late.  What  has  it  got  in  its 
pocketses?  he  cried.  The  light  in  his  eyes  was  like  a  green 
flame  as  he  sped  back  to  murder  the  hobbit  and  recover  his 
‘Precious’.  Just  in  time  Bilbo  saw  his  peril,  and  he  fled  blindly 
up  the  passage  away  from  the  water;  and  once  more  he  was 
saved  by  his  luck.  For  as  he  ran  he  put  his  hand  in  his  pocket, 
and  the  ring  slipped  quietly  on  to  his  finger.  So  it  was  that 
Gollum  passed  him  without  seeing  him,  and  went  to  guard 
the  way  out,  lest  the  ‘thief’  should  escape.  Warily  Bilbo  fol¬ 
lowed  him,  as  he  went  along,  cursing,  and  talking  to  himself 
about  his  ‘Precious’;  from  which  talk  at  last  even  Bilbo 
guessed  the  truth,  and  hope  came  to  him  in  the  darkness:  he 
himself  had  found  the  marvellous  ring  and  a  chance  of  escape 
from  the  ores  and  from  Gollum. 

At  length  they  came  to  a  halt  before  an  unseen  opening 
that  led  to  the  lower  gates  of  the  mines,  on  the  eastward  side 
of  the  mountains.  There  Gollum  crouched  at  bay,  smelling 
and  listening;  and  Bilbo  was  tempted  to  slay  him  with  his 
sword.  But  pity  stayed  him,  and  though  he  kept  the  ring,  in 
which  his  only  hope  lay,  he  would  not  use  it  to  help  him  kill 
the  wretched  creature  at  a  disadvantage.  In  the  end,  gathering 
his  courage,  he  leaped  over  Gollum  in  the  dark,  and  fled 
away  down  the  passage,  pursued  by  his  enemy’s  cries  of  hate 
and  despair:  Thief,  thief!  Baggins!  We  hates  it  for  ever! 

Now  it  is  a  curious  fact  that  this  is  not  the  story  as  Bilbo 
first  told  it  to  his  companions.  To  them  his  account  was  that 
Gollum  had  promised  to  give  him  a  present ,  if  he  won  the 


PROLOGUE 


17 


game;  but  when  Gollum  went  to  fetch  it  from  his  island  he 
found  the  treasure  was  gone:  a  magic  ring,  which  had  been 
given  to  him  long  ago  on  his  birthday.  Bilbo  guessed  that  this 
was  the  very  ring  that  he  had  found,  and  as  he  had  won  the 
game,  it  was  already  his  by  right.  But  being  in  a  tight  place, 
he  said  nothing  about  it,  and  made  Gollum  show  him  the 
way  out,  as  a  reward  instead  of  a  present.  This  account  Bilbo 
set  down  in  his  memoirs,  and  he  seems  never  to  have  altered 
it  himself,  not  even  after  the  Council  of  Elrond.  Evidently  it 
still  appeared  in  the  original  Red  Book,  as  it  did  in  several  of 
the  copies  and  abstracts.  But  many  copies  contain  the  true 
account  (as  an  alternative),  derived  no  doubt  from  notes  by 
Frodo  or  Samwise,  both  of  whom  learned  the  truth,  though 
they  seem  to  have  been  unwilling  to  delete  anything  actually 
written  by  the  old  hobbit  himself. 

Gandalf,  however,  disbelieved  Bilbo’s  first  story,  as  soon 
as  he  heard  it,  and  he  continued  to  be  very  curious  about  the 
ring.  Eventually  he  got  the  true  tale  out  of  Bilbo  after  much 
questioning,  which  for  a  while  strained  their  friendship;  but 
the  wizard  seemed  to  think  the  truth  important.  Though  he 
did  not  say  so  to  Bilbo,  he  also  thought  it  important,  and 
disturbing,  to  find  that  the  good  hobbit  had  not  told  the 
truth  from  the  first:  quite  contrary  to  his  habit.  The  idea  of  a 
‘present’  was  not  mere  hobbitlike  invention,  all  the  same.  It 
was  suggested  to  Bilbo,  as  he  confessed,  by  Gollum’s  talk 
that  he  overheard;  for  Gollum  did,  in  fact,  call  the  ring  his 
‘birthday-present’,  many  times.  That  also  Gandalf  thought 
strange  and  suspicious;  but  he  did  not  discover  the  truth 
in  this  point  for  many  more  years,  as  will  be  seen  in  this 
book. 

Of  Bilbo’s  later  adventures  little  more  need  be  said  here. 
With  the  help  of  the  ring  he  escaped  from  the  ore-guards  at 
the  gate  and  rejoined  his  companions.  He  used  the  ring  many 
times  on  his  quest,  chiefly  for  the  help  of  his  friends;  but  he 
kept  it  secret  from  them  as  long  as  he  could.  After  his  return 
to  his  home  he  never  spoke  of  it  again  to  anyone,  save  Gandalf 


NOTE  ON  THE  SHIRE  RECORDS 


and  Frodo;  and  no  one  else  in  the  Shire  knew  of  its  existence, 
or  so  he  believed.  Only  to  Frodo  did  he  show  the  account  of 
his  Journey  that  he  was  writing. 

His  sword,  Sting,  Bilbo  hung  over  his  fireplace,  and  his 
coat  of  marvellous  mail,  the  gift  of  the  Dwarves  from  the 
Dragon-hoard,  he  lent  to  a  museum,  to  the  Michel  Delving 
Mathom-house  in  fact.  But  he  kept  in  a  drawer  at  Bag  End 
the  old  cloak  and  hood  that  he  had  worn  on  his  travels; 
and  the  ring,  secured  by  a  fine  chain,  remained  in  his 
pocket. 

He  returned  to  his  home  at  Bag  End  on  June  the  22nd  in 
his  fifty-second  year  (S.R.  1342),  and  nothing  very  notable 
occurred  in  the  Shire  until  Mr.  Baggins  began  the  prep¬ 
arations  for  the  celebration  of  his  hundred-and-eleventh 
birthday  (S.R.  1401).  At  this  point  this  History  begins. 


NOTE  ON  THE  SHIRE  RECORDS 

At  the  end  of  the  Third  Age  the  part  played  by  the  Hobbits 
in  the  great  events  that  led  to  the  inclusion  of  the  Shire  in  the 
Reunited  Kingdom  awakened  among  them  a  more  wide¬ 
spread  interest  in  their  own  history;  and  many  of  their  tra¬ 
ditions,  up  to  that  time  still  mainly  oral,  were  collected  and 
written  down.  The  greater  families  were  also  concerned  with 
events  in  the  Kingdom  at  large,  and  many  of  their  members 
studied  its  ancient  histories  and  legends.  By  the  end  of  the 
first  century  of  the  Fourth  Age  there  were  already  to  be  found 
in  the  Shire  several  libraries  that  contained  many  historical 
books  and  records. 

The  largest  of  these  collections  were  probably  at  Under¬ 
towers,  at  Great  Smials,  and  at  Brandy  Hall.  This  account  of 
the  end  of  the  Third  Age  is  drawn  mainly  from  the  Red  Book 
of  Westmarch.  That  most  important  source  for  the  history 
of  the  War  of  the  Ring  was  so  called  because  it  was  long 
preserved  at  Undertowers,  the  home  of  the  Fairbairns, 


NOTE  ON  THE  SHIRE  RECORDS 


19 


Wardens  of  the  Westmarch.*  It  was  in  origin  Bilbo’s  private 
diary,  which  he  took  with  him  to  Rivendell.  Frodo  brought  it 
back  to  the  Shire,  together  with  many  loose  leaves  of  notes, 
and  during  S.R.  1420-1  he  nearly  filled  its  pages  with  his 
account  of  the  War.  But  annexed  to  it  and  preserved  with  it, 
probably  in  a  single  red  case,  were  the  three  large  volumes, 
bound  in  red  leather,  that  Bilbo  gave  to  him  as  a  parting  gift. 
To  these  four  volumes  there  was  added  in  Westmarch  a 
fifth  containing  commentaries,  genealogies,  and  various  other 
matter  concerning  the  hobbit  members  of  the  Fellowship. 

The  original  Red  Book  has  not  been  preserved,  but  many 
copies  were  made,  especially  of  the  first  volume,  for  the  use 
of  the  descendants  of  the  children  of  Master  Samwise.  The 
most  important  copy,  however,  has  a  different  history.  It  was 
kept  at  Great  Smials,  but  it  was  written  in  Gondor,  probably 
at  the  request  of  the  great-grandson  of  Peregrin,  and  com¬ 
pleted  in  S.R.  1592  (F.A.  172).  Its  southern  scribe  appended 
this  note:  Findegil,  King’s  Writer,  finished  this  work  in  IV 
172.  It  is  an  exact  copy  in  all  details  of  the  Thain’s  Book  in 
Minas  Tirith.  That  book  was  a  copy,  made  at  the  request  of 
King  Elessar,  of  the  Red  Book  of  the  Periannath,  and  was 
brought  to  him  by  the  Thain  Peregrin  when  he  retired  to 
Gondor  in  IV  64. 

The  Thain’s  Book  was  thus  the  first  copy  made  of  the  Red 
Book  and  contained  much  that  was  later  omitted  or  lost.  In 
Minas  Tirith  it  received  much  annotation,  and  many  correc¬ 
tions,  especially  of  names,  words,  and  quotations  in  the  Elvish 
languages;  and  there  was  added  to  it  an  abbreviated  version 
of  those  parts  of  The  Tale  of  Aragorn  and  Arwen  which  lie 
outside  the  account  of  the  War.  The  full  tale  is  stated  to  have 
been  written  by  Barahir,  grandson  of  the  Steward  Faramir, 
some  time  after  the  passing  of  the  King.  But  the  chief  impor¬ 
tance  of  Findegil’s  copy  is  that  it  alone  contains  the  whole  of 
Bilbo’s  ‘Translations  from  the  Elvish’.  These  three  volumes 

*  See  Appendix  B:  annals  1451,  1462,  1482;  and  note  at  end  of 
Appendix  C. 


20 


NOTE  ON  THE  SHIRE  RECORDS 


were  found  to  be  a  work  of  great  skill  and  learning  in  which, 
between  1403  and  1418,  he  had  used  all  the  sources  available 
to  him  in  Rivendell,  both  living  and  written.  But  since  they 
were  little  used  by  Frodo,  being  almost  entirely  concerned 
with  the  Elder  Days,  no  more  is  said  of  them  here. 

Since  Meriadoc  and  Peregrin  became  the  heads  of  their 
great  families,  and  at  the  same  time  kept  up  their  connexions 
with  Rohan  and  Gondor,  the  libraries  at  Bucklebury  and 
Tuckborough  contained  much  that  did  not  appear  in  the  Red 
Book.  In  Brandy  Hall  there  were  many  works  dealing  with 
Eriador  and  the  history  of  Rohan.  Some  of  these  were 
composed  or  begun  by  Meriadoc  himself,  though  in  the  Shire 
he  was  chiefly  remembered  for  his  Herblore  of  the  Shire ,  and 
for  his  Reckoning  of  Years  in  which  he  discussed  the  relation 
of  the  calendars  of  the  Shire  and  Bree  to  those  of  Rivendell, 
Gondor,  and  Rohan.  He  also  wrote  a  short  treatise  on  Old 
Words  and  Names  in  the  Shire ,  showing  special  interest  in 
discovering  the  kinship  with  the  language  of  the  Rohirrim 
of  such  ‘shire-words’  as  mathom  and  old  elements  in  place 
names. 

At  Great  Smials  the  books  were  of  less  interest  to  Shire- 
folk,  though  more  important  for  larger  history.  None  of  them 
was  written  by  Peregrin,  but  he  and  his  successors  collected 
many  manuscripts  written  by  scribes  of  Gondor:  mainly 
copies  or  summaries  of  histories  or  legends  relating  to  Elendil 
and  his  heirs.  Only  here  in  the  Shire  were  to  be  found  exten¬ 
sive  materials  for  the  history  of  Numenor  and  the  arising  of 
Sauron.  It  was  probably  at  Great  Smials  that  The  Tale  of 
Years*  was  put  together,  with  the  assistance  of  material 
collected  by  Meriadoc.  Though  the  dates  given  are  often 
conjectural,  especially  for  the  Second  Age,  they  deserve  atten¬ 
tion.  It  is  probable  that  Meriadoc  obtained  assistance  and 
information  from  Rivendell,  which  he  visited  more  than  once. 
There,  though  Elrond  had  departed,  his  sons  long  remained, 

*  Represented  in  much  reduced  form  in  Appendix  B  as  far  as  the 
end  of  the  Third  Age. 


NOTE  ON  THE  SHIRE  RECORDS 


21 


together  with  some  of  the  High-elven  folk.  It  is  said  that 
Celeborn  went  to  dwell  there  after  the  departure  of  Galadriel; 
but  there  is  no  record  of  the  day  when  at  last  he  sought  the 
Grey  Havens,  and  with  him  went  the  last  living  memory  of 
the  Elder  Days  in  Middle-earth. 


THE  FELLOWSHIP 
OF  THE  RING 


BEING  THE  FIRST  PART 
OF 

The  Lord  of  the  Rings 


BOOK  ONE 


Chapter  I 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


When  Mr.  Bilbo  Baggins  of  Bag  End  announced  that  he 
would  shortly  be  celebrating  his  eleventy-first  birthday  with 
a  party  of  special  magnificence,  there  was  much  talk  and 
excitement  in  Hobbiton. 

Bilbo  was  very  rich  and  very  peculiar,  and  had  been  the 
wonder  of  the  Shire  for  sixty  years,  ever  since  his  remarkable 
disappearance  and  unexpected  return.  The  riches  he  had 
brought  back  from  his  travels  had  now  become  a  local  legend, 
and  it  was  popularly  believed,  whatever  the  old  folk  might 
say,  that  the  Hill  at  Bag  End  was  full  of  tunnels  stuffed  with 
treasure.  And  if  that  was  not  enough  for  fame,  there  was  also 
his  prolonged  vigour  to  marvel  at.  Time  wore  on,  but  it 
seemed  to  have  little  effect  on  Mr.  Baggins.  At  ninety  he  was 
much  the  same  as  at  fifty.  At  ninety-nine  they  began  to  call 
him  well-preserved,  but  unchanged  would  have  been  nearer  the 
mark.  There  were  some  that  shook  their  heads  and  thought 
this  was  too  much  of  a  good  thing;  it  seemed  unfair  that 
anyone  should  possess  (apparently)  perpetual  youth  as  well 
as  (reputedly)  inexhaustible  wealth. 

‘It  will  have  to  be  paid  for,’  they  said.  ‘It  isn’t  natural,  and 
trouble  will  come  of  it!’ 

But  so  far  trouble  had  not  come;  and  as  Mr.  Baggins  was 
generous  with  his  money,  most  people  were  willing  to  for¬ 
give  him  his  oddities  and  his  good  fortune.  He  remained 
on  visiting  terms  with  his  relatives  (except,  of  course,  the 
Sackville-Bagginses),  and  he  had  many  devoted  admirers 
among  the  hobbits  of  poor  and  unimportant  families.  But  he 
had  no  close  friends,  until  some  of  his  younger  cousins  began 
to  grow  up. 


28 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


The  eldest  of  these,  and  Bilbo’s  favourite,  was  young  Frodo 
Baggins.  When  Bilbo  was  ninety-nine  he  adopted  Frodo  as 
his  heir,  and  brought  him  to  live  at  Bag  End;  and  the  hopes  of 
the  Sackville-Bagginses  were  finally  dashed.  Bilbo  and  Frodo 
happened  to  have  the  same  birthday,  September  22nd.  ‘You 
had  better  come  and  live  here,  Frodo  my  lad,’  said  Bilbo 
one  day;  ‘and  then  we  can  celebrate  our  birthday-parties 
comfortably  together.’  At  that  time  Frodo  was  still  in  his 
tweens,  as  the  hobbits  called  the  irresponsible  twenties 
between  childhood  and  coming  of  age  at  thirty-three. 

Twelve  more  years  passed.  Each  year  the  Bagginses  had 
given  very  lively  combined  birthday-parties  at  Bag  End;  but 
now  it  was  understood  that  something  quite  exceptional 
was  being  planned  for  that  autumn.  Bilbo  was  going  to  be 
eleventy-one,  ill,  a  rather  curious  number,  and  a  very  re¬ 
spectable  age  for  a  hobbit  (the  Old  Took  himself  had  only 
reached  130);  and  Frodo  was  going  to  be  thirty-three,  33,  an 
important  number:  the  date  of  his  ‘coming  of  age’. 

Tongues  began  to  wag  in  Hobbiton  and  Bywater;  and 
rumour  of  the  coming  event  travelled  all  over  the  Shire.  The 
history  and  character  of  Mr.  Bilbo  Baggins  became  once 
again  the  chief  topic  of  conversation;  and  the  older  folk 
suddenly  found  their  reminiscences  in  welcome  demand. 

No  one  had  a  more  attentive  audience  than  old  Flam 
Gamgee,  commonly  known  as  the  Gaffer.  Fie  held  forth  at 
The  Ivy  Bush,  a  small  inn  on  the  Bywater  road;  and  he  spoke 
with  some  authority,  for  he  had  tended  the  garden  at  Bag 
End  for  forty  years,  and  had  helped  old  Holman  in  the  same 
job  before  that.  Now  that  he  was  himself  growing  old  and 
stiff  in  the  joints,  the  job  was  mainly  carried  on  by  his  young¬ 
est  son,  Sam  Gamgee.  Both  father  and  son  were  on  very 
friendly  terms  with  Bilbo  and  Frodo.  They  lived  on  the  Hill 
itself,  in  Number  3  Bagshot  Row  just  below  Bag  End. 

‘A  very  nice  well-spoken  gentlehobbit  is  Mr.  Bilbo,  as  I’ve 
always  said,’  the  Gaffer  declared.  With  perfect  truth:  for  Bilbo 
was  very  polite  to  him,  calling  him  ‘Master  Hamfast’,  and 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


29 


consulting  him  constantly  upon  the  growing  of  vegetables  - 
in  the  matter  of  ‘roots’,  especially  potatoes,  the  Gaffer  was 
recognized  as  the  leading  authority  by  all  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood  (including  himself) . 

‘But  what  about  this  Frodo  that  lives  with  him?’  asked  Old 
Noakes  of  Bywater.  ‘Baggins  is  his  name,  but  he’s  more  than 
half  a  Brandybuck,  they  say.  It  beats  me  why  any  Baggins 
of  Hobbiton  should  go  looking  for  a  wife  away  there  in 
Buckland,  where  folks  are  so  queer.’ 

‘And  no  wonder  they’re  queer,’  put  in  Daddy  Twofoot 
(the  Gaffer’s  next-door  neighbour),  ‘if  they  live  on  the  wrong 
side  of  the  Brandywine  River,  and  right  agin  the  Old  Forest. 
That’s  a  dark  bad  place,  if  half  the  tales  be  true.’ 

‘You’re  right,  Dad!’  said  the  Gaffer.  ‘Not  that  the  Brandy- 
bucks  of  Buckland  live  in  the  Old  Forest;  but  they’re  a  queer 
breed,  seemingly.  They  fool  about  with  boats  on  that  big 
river  -  and  that  isn’t  natural.  Small  wonder  that  trouble  came 
of  it,  I  say.  But  be  that  as  it  may,  Mr.  Frodo  is  as  nice  a 
young  hobbit  as  you  could  wish  to  meet.  Very  much  like 
Mr.  Bilbo,  and  in  more  than  looks.  After  all  his  father  was 
a  Baggins.  A  decent  respectable  hobbit  was  Mr.  Drogo 
Baggins;  there  was  never  much  to  tell  of  him,  till  he  was 
drownded.’ 

‘Drownded?’  said  several  voices.  They  had  heard  this  and 
other  darker  rumours  before,  of  course;  but  hobbits  have  a 
passion  for  family  history,  and  they  were  ready  to  hear  it 
again. 

‘Well,  so  they  say,’  said  the  Gaffer.  ‘You  see:  Mr.  Drogo, 
he  married  poor  Miss  Primula  Brandybuck.  She  was  our  Mr. 
Bilbo’s  first  cousin  on  the  mother’s  side  (her  mother  being 
the  youngest  of  the  Old  Took’s  daughters);  and  Mr.  Drogo 
was  his  second  cousin.  So  Mr.  Frodo  is  his  first  and  second 
cousin,  once  removed  either  way,  as  the  saying  is,  if  you 
follow  me.  And  Mr.  Drogo  was  staying  at  Brandy  Hall  with 
his  father-in-law,  old  Master  Gorbadoc,  as  he  often  did 
after  his  marriage  (him  being  partial  to  his  vittles,  and  old 
Gorbadoc  keeping  a  mighty  generous  table) ;  and  he  went  out 


30 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


boating  on  the  Brandywine  River;  and  he  and  his  wife  were 
drownded,  and  poor  Mr.  Frodo  only  a  child  and  all.’ 

‘I’ve  heard  they  went  on  the  water  after  dinner  in  the 
moonlight,’  said  Old  Noakes;  ‘and  it  was  Drogo’s  weight  as 
sunk  the  boat.’ 

‘And  /  heard  she  pushed  him  in,  and  he  pulled  her  in  after 
him,’  said  Sandyman,  the  Hobbiton  miller. 

‘You  shouldn’t  listen  to  all  you  hear,  Sandyman,’  said  the 
Gaffer,  who  did  not  much  like  the  miller.  ‘There  isn’t  no  call 
to  go  talking  of  pushing  and  pulling.  Boats  are  quite  tricky 
enough  for  those  that  sit  still  without  looking  further  for  the 
cause  of  trouble.  Anyway:  there  was  this  Mr.  Frodo  left  an 
orphan  and  stranded,  as  you  might  say,  among  those  queer 
Bucklanders,  being  brought  up  anyhow  in  Brandy  Hall.  A 
regular  warren,  by  all  accounts.  Old  Master  Gorbadoc  never 
had  fewer  than  a  couple  of  hundred  relations  in  the  place. 
Mr.  Bilbo  never  did  a  kinder  deed  than  when  he  brought  the 
lad  back  to  live  among  decent  folk. 

‘But  I  reckon  it  was  a  nasty  knock  for  those  Sackville- 
Bagginses.  They  thought  they  were  going  to  get  Bag  End, 
that  time  when  he  went  off  and  was  thought  to  be  dead.  And 
then  he  comes  back  and  orders  them  off;  and  he  goes  on 
living  and  living,  and  never  looking  a  day  older,  bless  him! 
And  suddenly  he  produces  an  heir,  and  has  all  the  papers 
made  out  proper.  The  Sackville-Bagginses  won’t  never  see 
the  inside  of  Bag  End  now,  or  it  is  to  be  hoped  not.’ 

‘There’s  a  tidy  bit  of  money  tucked  away  up  there,  I  hear 
tell,’  said  a  stranger,  a  visitor  on  business  from  Michel 
Delving  in  the  Westfarthing.  ‘All  the  top  of  your  hill  is  full  of 
tunnels  packed  with  chests  of  gold  and  silver,  and  jools,  by 
what  I’ve  heard.’ 

‘Then  you’ve  heard  more  than  I  can  speak  to,’  answered 
the  Gaffer.  ‘I  know  nothing  about  jools.  Mr.  Bilbo  is  free  with 
his  money,  and  there  seems  no  lack  of  it;  but  I  know  of  no 
tunnel-making.  I  saw  Mr.  Bilbo  when  he  came  back,  a  matter 
of  sixty  years  ago,  when  I  was  a  lad.  I’d  not  long  come 
prentice  to  old  Holman  (him  being  my  dad’s  cousin),  but  he 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


31 


had  me  up  at  Bag  End  helping  him  to  keep  folks  from  tram¬ 
pling  and  trapessing  all  over  the  garden  while  the  sale  was 
on.  And  in  the  middle  of  it  all  Mr.  Bilbo  comes  up  the  Hill 
with  a  pony  and  some  mighty  big  bags  and  a  couple  of  chests. 
I  don’t  doubt  they  were  mostly  full  of  treasure  he  had  picked 
up  in  foreign  parts,  where  there  be  mountains  of  gold,  they 
say;  but  there  wasn’t  enough  to  fill  tunnels.  But  my  lad  Sam 
will  know  more  about  that.  He’s  in  and  out  of  Bag  End. 
Crazy  about  stories  of  the  old  days,  he  is,  and  he  listens  to 
all  Mr.  Bilbo’s  tales.  Mr.  Bilbo  has  learned  him  his  letters  - 
meaning  no  harm,  mark  you,  and  I  hope  no  harm  will  come 
of  it. 

‘ Elves  and  Dragons!  I  says  to  him.  Cabbages  and  potatoes  are 
better  for  me  and  yon.  Don’t  go  getting  mixed  up  in  the  business 
of  your  betters,  or  you’ll  land  in  trouble  too  big  for  you,  I  says  to 
him.  And  I  might  say  it  to  others,’  he  added  with  a  look  at 
the  stranger  and  the  miller. 

But  the  Gaffer  did  not  convince  his  audience.  The  legend 
of  Bilbo’s  wealth  was  now  too  firmly  fixed  in  the  minds  of 
the  younger  generation  of  hobbits. 

‘Ah,  but  he  has  likely  enough  been  adding  to  what  he 
brought  at  first,’  argued  the  miller,  voicing  common  opinion. 
‘He’s  often  away  from  home.  And  look  at  the  outlandish  folk 
that  visit  him:  dwarves  coming  at  night,  and  that  old  wandering 
conjuror,  Gandalf,  and  all.  You  can  say  what  you  like,  Gaffer, 
but  Bag  End’s  a  queer  place,  and  its  folk  are  queerer.’ 

‘And  you  can  say  what  you  like,  about  what  you  know  no 
more  of  than  you  do  of  boating,  Mr.  Sandyman,’  retorted 
the  Gaffer,  disliking  the  miller  even  more  than  usual.  ‘If  that’s 
being  queer,  then  we  could  do  with  a  bit  more  queerness  in 
these  parts.  There’s  some  not  far  away  that  wouldn’t  offer  a 
pint  of  beer  to  a  friend,  if  they  lived  in  a  hole  with  golden 
walls.  But  they  do  things  proper  at  Bag  End.  Our  Sam  says 
that  everyone’s  going  to  be  invited  to  the  party,  and  there’s 
going  to  be  presents,  mark  you,  presents  for  all  -  this  very 
month  as  is.’ 


32 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


That  very  month  was  September,  and  as  fine  as  you  could 
ask.  A  day  or  two  later  a  rumour  (probably  started  by  the 
knowledgeable  Sam)  was  spread  about  that  there  were  going 
to  be  fireworks  -  fireworks,  what  is  more,  such  as  had  not 
been  seen  in  the  Shire  for  nigh  on  a  century,  not  indeed  since 
the  Old  Took  died. 

Days  passed  and  The  Day  drew  nearer.  An  odd-looking 
waggon  laden  with  odd-looking  packages  rolled  into  Hobbi- 
ton  one  evening  and  toiled  up  the  Hill  to  Bag  End.  The 
startled  hobbits  peered  out  of  lamplit  doors  to  gape  at  it.  It 
was  driven  by  outlandish  folk,  singing  strange  songs:  dwarves 
with  long  beards  and  deep  hoods.  A  few  of  them  remained 
at  Bag  End.  At  the  end  of  the  second  week  in  September  a 
cart  came  in  through  Bywater  from  the  direction  of  Brandy¬ 
wine  Bridge  in  broad  daylight.  An  old  man  was  driving  it  all 
alone.  He  wore  a  tall  pointed  blue  hat,  a  long  grey  cloak,  and 
a  silver  scarf.  He  had  a  long  white  beard  and  bushy  eyebrows 
that  stuck  out  beyond  the  brim  of  his  hat.  Small  hobbit- 
children  ran  after  the  cart  all  through  Hobbiton  and  right  up 
the  hill.  It  had  a  cargo  of  fireworks,  as  they  rightly  guessed. 
At  Bilbo’s  front  door  the  old  man  began  to  unload:  there 
were  great  bundles  of  fireworks  of  all  sorts  and  shapes,  each 
labelled  with  a  large  red  G  ^  and  the  elf-rune,  JJ>! 

That  was  Gandalf’s  mark,  of  course,  and  the  old  man 
was  Gandalf  the  Wizard,  whose  fame  in  the  Shire  was  due 
mainly  to  his  skill  with  fires,  smokes,  and  lights.  His  real 
business  was  far  more  difficult  and  dangerous,  but  the 
Shire -folk  knew  nothing  about  it.  To  them  he  was  just  one 
of  the  ‘attractions’  at  the  Party.  Hence  the  excitement  of 
the  hobbit-children.  ‘G  for  Grand!’  they  shouted,  and  the 
old  man  smiled.  They  knew  him  by  sight,  though  he  only 
appeared  in  Hobbiton  occasionally  and  never  stopped  long; 
but  neither  they  nor  any  but  the  oldest  of  their  elders  had 
seen  one  of  his  firework  displays  -  they  now  belonged  to  a 
legendary  past. 

When  the  old  man,  helped  by  Bilbo  and  some  dwarves, 
had  finished  unloading,  Bilbo  gave  a  few  pennies  away;  but 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY  33 

not  a  single  squib  or  cracker  was  forthcoming,  to  the  dis¬ 
appointment  of  the  onlookers. 

‘Run  away  now!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘You  will  get  plenty  when 
the  time  comes.’  Then  he  disappeared  inside  with  Bilbo,  and 
the  door  was  shut.  The  young  hobbits  stared  at  the  door  in 
vain  for  a  while,  and  then  made  off,  feeling  that  the  day  of 
the  party  would  never  come. 

Inside  Bag  End,  Bilbo  and  Gandalf  were  sitting  at  the  open 
window  of  a  small  room  looking  out  west  on  to  the  garden. 
The  late  afternoon  was  bright  and  peaceful.  The  flowers 
glowed  red  and  golden:  snap-dragons  and  sunflowers,  and 
nasturtians  trailing  all  over  the  turf  walls  and  peeping  in  at 
the  round  windows. 

‘How  bright  your  garden  looks!’  said  Gandalf. 

‘Yes,’  said  Bilbo.  ‘I  am  very  fond  indeed  of  it,  and  of  all 
the  dear  old  Shire;  but  I  think  I  need  a  holiday.’ 

‘You  mean  to  go  on  with  your  plan  then?’ 

‘I  do.  I  made  up  my  mind  months  ago,  and  I  haven’t 
changed  it.  ’ 

‘Very  well.  It  is  no  good  saying  any  more.  Stick  to  your 
plan  -  your  whole  plan,  mind  -  and  I  hope  it  will  turn  out 
for  the  best,  for  you,  and  for  all  of  us.’ 

‘I  hope  so.  Anyway  I  mean  to  enjoy  myself  on  Thursday, 
and  have  my  little  joke.’ 

‘Who  will  laugh,  I  wonder?’  said  Gandalf,  shaking  his  head. 

‘We  shall  see,’  said  Bilbo. 

The  next  day  more  carts  rolled  up  the  Hill,  and  still  more 
carts.  There  might  have  been  some  grumbling  about  ‘dealing 
locally’,  but  that  very  week  orders  began  to  pour  out  of  Bag 
End  for  every  kind  of  provision,  commodity,  or  luxury  that 
could  be  obtained  in  Hobbiton  or  Bywater  or  anywhere  in 
the  neighbourhood.  People  became  enthusiastic;  and  they 
began  to  tick  off  the  days  on  the  calendar;  and  they  watched 
eagerly  for  the  postman,  hoping  for  invitations. 

Before  long  the  invitations  began  pouring  out,  and  the 


34 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Hobbiton  post-office  was  blocked,  and  the  Bywater  post- 
office  was  snowed  under,  and  voluntary  assistant  postmen 
were  called  for.  There  was  a  constant  stream  of  them  going 
up  the  Hill,  carrying  hundreds  of  polite  variations  on  Thank 
you,  I  shall  certainly  come. 

A  notice  appeared  on  the  gate  at  Bag  End:  no  admit¬ 
tance  except  on  party  business.  Even  those  who  had, 
or  pretended  to  have  Party  Business  were  seldom  allowed 
inside.  Bilbo  was  busy:  writing  invitations,  ticking  off 
answers,  packing  up  presents,  and  making  some  private 
preparations  of  his  own.  From  the  time  of  Gandalf ’s  arrival 
he  remained  hidden  from  view. 

One  morning  the  hobbits  woke  to  find  the  large  field,  south 
of  Bilbo’s  front  door,  covered  with  ropes  and  poles  for  tents 
and  pavilions.  A  special  entrance  was  cut  into  the  bank 
leading  to  the  road,  and  wide  steps  and  a  large  white  gate 
were  built  there.  The  three  hobbit-families  of  Bagshot  Row, 
adjoining  the  field,  were  intensely  interested  and  generally 
envied.  Old  Gaffer  Gamgee  stopped  even  pretending  to  work 
in  his  garden. 

The  tents  began  to  go  up.  There  was  a  specially  large 
pavilion,  so  big  that  the  tree  that  grew  in  the  field  was  right 
inside  it,  and  stood  proudly  near  one  end,  at  the  head  of 
the  chief  table.  Lanterns  were  hung  on  all  its  branches. 
More  promising  still  (to  the  hobbits’  mind):  an  enormous 
open-air  kitchen  was  erected  in  the  north  corner  of  the  field. 
A  draught  of  cooks,  from  every  inn  and  eating-house  for 
miles  around,  arrived  to  supplement  the  dwarves  and  other 
odd  folic  that  were  quartered  at  Bag  End.  Excitement  rose  to 
its  height. 

Then  the  weather  clouded  over.  That  was  on  Wednesday 
the  eve  of  the  Party.  Anxiety  was  intense.  Then  Thursday, 
September  the  22nd,  actually  dawned.  The  sun  got  up,  the 
clouds  vanished,  flags  were  unfurled  and  the  fun  began. 

Bilbo  Baggins  called  it  a  party,  but  it  was  really  a  variety 
of  entertainments  rolled  into  one.  Practically  everybody  living 
near  was  invited.  A  very  few  were  overlooked  by  accident, 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


35 


but  as  they  turned  up  all  the  same,  that  did  not  matter.  Many 
people  from  other  parts  of  the  Shire  were  also  asked;  and 
there  were  even  a  few  from  outside  the  borders.  Bilbo  met 
the  guests  (and  additions)  at  the  new  white  gate  in  person. 
He  gave  away  presents  to  all  and  sundry  -  the  latter  were 
those  who  went  out  again  by  a  back  way  and  came  in  again 
by  the  gate.  Hobbits  give  presents  to  other  people  on  their 
own  birthdays.  Not  very  expensive  ones,  as  a  rule,  and  not 
so  lavishly  as  on  this  occasion;  but  it  was  not  a  bad  system. 
Actually  in  Hobbiton  and  Bywater  every  day  in  the  year  was 
somebody’s  birthday,  so  that  every  hobbit  in  those  parts  had 
a  fair  chance  of  at  least  one  present  at  least  once  a  week.  But 
they  never  got  tired  of  them. 

On  this  occasion  the  presents  were  unusually  good.  The 
hobbit-children  were  so  excited  that  for  a  while  they  almost 
forgot  about  eating.  There  were  toys  the  like  of  which  they 
had  never  seen  before,  all  beautiful  and  some  obviously  magi¬ 
cal.  Many  of  them  had  indeed  been  ordered  a  year  before, 
and  had  come  all  the  way  from  the  Mountain  and  from  Dale, 
and  were  of  real  dwarf-make. 

When  every  guest  had  been  welcomed  and  was  finally 
inside  the  gate,  there  were  songs,  dances,  music,  games,  and, 
of  course,  food  and  drink.  There  were  three  official  meals: 
lunch,  tea,  and  dinner  (or  supper) .  But  lunch  and  tea  were 
marked  chiefly  by  the  fact  that  at  those  times  all  the  guests 
were  sitting  down  and  eating  together.  At  other  times  there 
were  merely  lots  of  people  eating  and  drinking  -  continuously 
from  elevenses  until  six -thirty,  when  the  fireworks  started. 

The  fireworks  were  by  Gandalf:  they  were  not  only  brought 
by  him,  but  designed  and  made  by  him;  and  the  special 
effects,  set  pieces,  and  flights  of  rockets  were  let  off  by 
him.  But  there  was  also  a  generous  distribution  of  squibs, 
crackers,  backarappers,  sparklers,  torches,  dwarf-candles,  elf- 
fountains,  goblin-barkers  and  thunder-claps.  They  were  all 
superb.  The  art  of  Gandalf  improved  with  age. 

There  were  rockets  like  a  flight  of  scintillating  birds  singing 
with  sweet  voices.  There  were  green  trees  with  trunks  of  dark 


36 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


smoke:  their  leaves  opened  like  a  whole  spring  unfolding  in  a 
moment,  and  their  shining  branches  dropped  glowing  flowers 
down  upon  the  astonished  hobbits,  disappearing  with  a  sweet 
scent  just  before  they  touched  their  upturned  faces.  There 
were  fountains  of  butterflies  that  flew  glittering  into  the  trees; 
there  were  pillars  of  coloured  fires  that  rose  and  turned  into 
eagles,  or  sailing  ships,  or  a  phalanx  of  flying  swans;  there 
was  a  red  thunderstorm  and  a  shower  of  yellow  rain;  there 
was  a  forest  of  silver  spears  that  sprang  suddenly  into  the  air 
with  a  yell  like  an  embattled  army,  and  came  down  again  into 
the  Water  with  a  hiss  like  a  hundred  hot  snakes.  And  there 
was  also  one  last  surprise,  in  honour  of  Bilbo,  and  it  startled 
the  hobbits  exceedingly,  as  Gandalf  intended.  The  lights  went 
out.  A  great  smoke  went  up.  It  shaped  itself  like  a  mountain 
seen  in  the  distance,  and  began  to  glow  at  the  summit.  It 
spouted  green  and  scarlet  flames.  Out  flew  a  red-golden 
dragon  -  not  life-size,  but  terribly  life-like:  fire  came  from  his 
jaws,  his  eyes  glared  down;  there  was  a  roar,  and  he  whizzed 
three  times  over  the  heads  of  the  crowd.  They  all  ducked, 
and  many  fell  flat  on  their  faces.  The  dragon  passed  like  an 
express  train,  turned  a  somersault,  and  burst  over  Bywater 
with  a  deafening  explosion. 

‘That  is  the  signal  for  supper!’  said  Bilbo.  The  pain  and 
alarm  vanished  at  once,  and  the  prostrate  hobbits  leaped  to 
their  feet.  There  was  a  splendid  supper  for  everyone;  for 
everyone,  that  is,  except  those  invited  to  the  special  family 
dinner-party.  This  was  held  in  the  great  pavilion  with  the 
tree.  The  invitations  were  limited  to  twelve  dozen  (a  number 
also  called  by  the  hobbits  one  Gross,  though  the  word  was 
not  considered  proper  to  use  of  people);  and  the  guests  were 
selected  from  all  the  families  to  which  Bilbo  and  Frodo  were 
related,  with  the  addition  of  a  few  special  unrelated  friends 
(such  as  Gandalf) .  Many  young  hobbits  were  included,  and 
present  by  parental  permission;  for  hobbits  were  easy-going 
with  their  children  in  the  matter  of  sitting  up  late,  especially 
when  there  was  a  chance  of  getting  them  a  free  meal.  Bringing 
up  young  hobbits  took  a  lot  of  provender. 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


37 


There  were  many  Bagginses  and  Boffins,  and  also  many 
Tooks  and  Brandybucks;  there  were  various  Grubbs  (re¬ 
lations  of  Bilbo  Baggins’  grandmother),  and  various  Chubbs 
(connexions  of  his  Took  grandfather);  and  a  selection  of 
Burrowses,  Bolgers,  Bracegirdles,  Brockhouses,  Goodbodies, 
Hornblowers  and  Proudfoots.  Some  of  these  were  only  very 
distantly  connected  with  Bilbo,  and  some  had  hardly  ever 
been  in  Hobbiton  before,  as  they  lived  in  remote  corners  of 
the  Shire.  The  Sackville -Bagginses  were  not  forgotten.  Otho 
and  his  wife  Lobelia  were  present.  They  disliked  Bilbo  and 
detested  Frodo,  but  so  magnificent  was  the  invitation  card, 
written  in  golden  ink,  that  they  had  felt  it  was  impossible  to 
refuse.  Besides,  their  cousin,  Bilbo,  had  been  specializing  in 
food  for  many  years  and  his  table  had  a  high  reputation. 

All  the  one  hundred  and  forty-four  guests  expected  a  pleas¬ 
ant  feast;  though  they  rather  dreaded  the  after-dinner  speech 
of  their  host  (an  inevitable  item) .  He  was  liable  to  drag  in  bits 
of  what  he  called  poetry;  and  sometimes,  after  a  glass  or 
two,  would  allude  to  the  absurd  adventures  of  his  mysterious 
journey.  The  guests  were  not  disappointed:  they  had  a  very 
pleasant  feast,  in  fact  an  engrossing  entertainment:  rich, 
abundant,  varied,  and  prolonged.  The  purchase  of  provisions 
fell  almost  to  nothing  throughout  the  district  in  the  ensuing 
weeks;  but  as  Bilbo’s  catering  had  depleted  the  stocks  of  most 
of  the  stores,  cellars  and  warehouses  for  miles  around,  that 
did  not  matter  much. 

After  the  feast  (more  or  less)  came  the  Speech.  Most  of 
the  company  were,  however,  now  in  a  tolerant  mood,  at  that 
delightful  stage  which  they  called  ‘filling  up  the  corners’. 
They  were  sipping  their  favourite  drinks,  and  nibbling  at  their 
favourite  dainties,  and  their  fears  were  forgotten.  They  were 
prepared  to  listen  to  anything,  and  to  cheer  at  every  full  stop. 

My  dear  People ,  began  Bilbo,  rising  in  his  place.  ‘Hear! 
Hear!  Hear!’  they  shouted,  and  kept  on  repeating  it  in  chorus, 
seeming  reluctant  to  follow  their  own  advice.  Bilbo  left  his 
place  and  went  and  stood  on  a  chair  under  the  illuminated 
tree.  The  light  of  the  lanterns  fell  on  his  beaming  face;  the 


38 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


golden  buttons  shone  on  his  embroidered  silk  waistcoat.  They 
could  all  see  him  standing,  waving  one  hand  in  the  air,  the 
other  was  in  his  trouser-pocket. 

My  dear  Bagginses  and  Boffins ,  he  began  again;  and  my 
dear  Books  and  Brandybucks,  and  Grubbs,  and  Chubbs,  and 
Burrowses,  and  Hornblowers,  and  Bolgers,  Bracegirdles,  Good- 
bodies,  Brockhouses  and  Proudfoots.  ‘ProudFEETl’  shouted  an 
elderly  hobbit  from  the  back  of  the  pavilion.  His  name,  of 
course,  was  Proudfoot,  and  well  merited;  his  feet  were  large, 
exceptionally  furry,  and  both  were  on  the  table. 

Proudfoots,  repeated  Bilbo.  Also  my  good  Sackville-Bagginses 
that  I  welcome  back  at  last  to  Bag  End.  Today  is  my  one  hundred 
and  eleventh  birthday:  I  am  eleventy-one  today!  ‘Hurray!  Hur¬ 
ray!  Many  Happy  Returns!’  they  shouted,  and  they  ham¬ 
mered  joyously  on  the  tables.  Bilbo  was  doing  splendidly. 
This  was  the  sort  of  stuff  they  liked:  short  and  obvious. 

I  hope  you  are  all  enjoying  yourselves  as  much  as  I  am.  Deaf¬ 
ening  cheers.  Cries  of  Yes  (and  No).  Noises  of  trumpets  and 
horns,  pipes  and  flutes,  and  other  musical  instruments.  There 
were,  as  has  been  said,  many  young  hobbits  present.  Hun¬ 
dreds  of  musical  crackers  had  been  pulled.  Most  of  them 
bore  the  mark  dale  on  them;  which  did  not  convey  much  to 
most  of  the  hobbits,  but  they  all  agreed  they  were  marvellous 
crackers.  They  contained  instruments,  small,  but  of  perfect 
make  and  enchanting  tones.  Indeed,  in  one  corner  some  of 
the  young  Tooks  and  Brandybucks,  supposing  Uncle  Bilbo 
to  have  finished  (since  he  had  plainly  said  all  that  was  neces¬ 
sary),  now  got  up  an  impromptu  orchestra,  and  began  a 
merry  dance-tune.  Master  Everard  Took  and  Miss  Melilot 
Brandybuck  got  on  a  table  and  with  bells  in  their  hands 
began  to  dance  the  Springle-ring:  a  pretty  dance,  but  rather 
vigorous. 

But  Bilbo  had  not  finished.  Seizing  a  horn  from  a  youngster 
nearby,  he  blew  three  loud  hoots.  The  noise  subsided.  I  shall 
not  keep  you  long,  he  cried.  Cheers  from  all  the  assembly.  / 
have  called  you  all  together  for  a  Purpose.  Something  in  the 
way  that  he  said  this  made  an  impression.  There  was  almost 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


39 


silence,  and  one  or  two  of  the  Tooks  pricked  up  their  ears. 

Indeed,  for  Three  Purposes!  First  of  all,  to  tell  you  that  I  am 
immensely  fond  of  you  all,  and  that  eleventy-one  years  is  too 
short  a  time  to  live  among  such  excellent  and  admirable  hobbits. 
Tremendous  outburst  of  approval. 

I  don’t  know  half  of  you  half  as  well  as  I  should  like;  and  I 
like  less  than  half  of  you  half  as  well  as  you  deserve.  This  was 
unexpected  and  rather  difficult.  There  was  some  scattered 
clapping,  but  most  of  them  were  trying  to  work  it  out  and 
see  if  it  came  to  a  compliment. 

Secondly,  to  celebrate  my  birthday.  Cheers  again.  I  should 
say:  OUR  birthday.  For  it  is,  of  course,  also  the  birthday  of  my 
heir  and  nephew,  Frodo.  He  comes  of  age  and  into  his  inheritance 
today.  Some  perfunctory  clapping  by  the  elders;  and  some 
loud  shouts  of  ‘Frodo!  Frodo!  Jolly  old  Frodo,’  from  the 
juniors.  The  Sackville-Bagginses  scowled,  and  wondered 
what  was  meant  by  ‘coming  into  his  inheritance’. 

Together  we  score  one  hundred  and  forty-four.  Your  numbers 
were  chosen  to  fit  this  remarkable  total:  One  Gross,  if  I  may  use 
the  expression.  No  cheers.  This  was  ridiculous.  Many  of  the 
guests,  and  especially  the  Sackville-Bagginses,  were  insulted, 
feeling  sure  they  had  only  been  asked  to  fill  up  the  required 
number,  like  goods  in  a  package.  ‘One  Gross,  indeed!  Vulgar 
expression.’ 

It  is  also,  if  I  may  be  allowed  to  refer  to  ancient  history,  the 
anniversary  of  my  arrival  by  barrel  at  Esgaroth  on  the  Long 
Lake;  though  the  fact  that  it  was  my  birthday  slipped  my  memory 
on  that  occasion.  I  was  only  fifty -one  then,  and  birthdays  did  not 
seem  so  important.  The  banquet  was  very  splendid,  however, 
though  I  had  a  bad  cold  at  the  time,  I  remember,  and  could  only 
say  ‘thag you  very  buch’.  I  now  repeat  it  more  correctly:  Thank 
you  very  much  for  coming  to  my  little  party.  Obstinate  silence. 
They  all  feared  that  a  song  or  some  poetry  was  now  immi¬ 
nent;  and  they  were  getting  bored.  Why  couldn’t  he  stop 
talking  and  let  them  drink  his  health?  But  Bilbo  did  not  sing 
or  recite.  He  paused  for  a  moment. 

Thirdly  and  finally,  he  said,  I  wish  to  make  an 


40 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


ANNOUNCEMENT.  He  spoke  this  last  word  so  loudly  and 
suddenly  that  everyone  sat  up  who  still  could.  I  regret  to 
announce  that  -  though,  as  I  said,  eleventy-one  years  is  far  too 
short  a  time  to  spend  among  you  -  this  is  the  END.  I  am  going. 
Iam  leaving  NOW.  GOOD-BYE! 

He  stepped  down  and  vanished.  There  was  a  blinding  flash 
of  light,  and  the  guests  all  blinked.  When  they  opened  their 
eyes  Bilbo  was  nowhere  to  be  seen.  One  hundred  and  forty- 
four  flabbergasted  hobbits  sat  back  speechless.  Old  Odo 
Proudfoot  removed  his  feet  from  the  table  and  stamped. 
Then  there  was  a  dead  silence,  until  suddenly,  after  several 
deep  breaths,  every  Baggins,  Boffin,  Took,  Brandybuck, 
Grubb,  Chubb,  Burrows,  Bolger,  Bracegirdle,  Brockhouse, 
Goodbody,  Hornblower,  and  Proudfoot  began  to  talk  at  once. 

It  was  generally  agreed  that  the  joke  was  in  very  bad  taste, 
and  more  food  and  drink  were  needed  to  cure  the  guests  of 
shock  and  annoyance.  ‘He’s  mad.  I  always  said  so,’  was 
probably  the  most  popular  comment.  Even  the  Tooks  (with 
a  few  exceptions)  thought  Bilbo’s  behaviour  was  absurd.  For 
the  moment  most  of  them  took  it  for  granted  that  his 
disappearance  was  nothing  more  than  a  ridiculous  prank. 

But  old  Rory  Brandybuck  was  not  so  sure.  Neither  age  nor 
an  enormous  dinner  had  clouded  his  wits,  and  he  said  to  his 
daughter-in-law,  Esmeralda:  ‘There’s  something  fishy  in  this, 
my  dear!  I  believe  that  mad  Baggins  is  off  again.  Silly  old 
fool.  But  why  worry?  He  hasn’t  taken  the  vittles  with  him.’ 
He  called  loudly  to  Frodo  to  send  the  wine  round  again. 

Frodo  was  the  only  one  present  who  had  said  nothing.  For 
some  time  he  had  sat  silent  beside  Bilbo’s  empty  chair,  and 
ignored  all  remarks  and  questions.  He  had  enjoyed  the  joke, 
of  course,  even  though  he  had  been  in  the  know.  He  had 
difficulty  in  keeping  from  laughter  at  the  indignant  surprise 
of  the  guests.  But  at  the  same  time  he  felt  deeply  troubled: 
he  realized  suddenly  that  he  loved  the  old  hobbit  dearly.  Most 
of  the  guests  went  on  eating  and  drinking  and  discussing 
Bilbo  Baggins’  oddities,  past  and  present;  but  the  Sackville- 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


41 


Bagginses  had  already  departed  in  wrath.  Frodo  did  not  want 
to  have  any  more  to  do  with  the  party.  He  gave  orders  for 
more  wine  to  be  served;  then  he  got  up  and  drained  his  own 
glass  silently  to  the  health  of  Bilbo,  and  slipped  out  of  the 
pavilion. 

As  for  Bilbo  Baggins,  even  while  he  was  making  his  speech, 
he  had  been  fingering  the  golden  ring  in  his  pocket:  his  magic 
ring  that  he  had  kept  secret  for  so  many  years.  As  he  stepped 
down  he  slipped  it  on  his  finger,  and  he  was  never  seen  by 
any  hobbit  in  Hobbiton  again. 

He  walked  briskly  back  to  his  hole,  and  stood  for  a  moment 
listening  with  a  smile  to  the  din  in  the  pavilion,  and  to  the 
sounds  of  merrymaking  in  other  parts  of  the  field.  Then  he 
went  in.  He  took  off  his  party  clothes,  folded  up  and  wrapped 
in  tissue-paper  his  embroidered  silk  waistcoat,  and  put  it 
away.  Then  he  put  on  quickly  some  old  untidy  garments, 
and  fastened  round  his  waist  a  worn  leather  belt.  On  it  he 
hung  a  short  sword  in  a  battered  black-leather  scabbard. 
From  a  locked  drawer,  smelling  of  moth-balls,  he  took 
out  an  old  cloak  and  hood.  They  had  been  locked  up  as  if 
they  were  very  precious,  but  they  were  so  patched  and 
weatherstained  that  their  original  colour  could  hardly  be 
guessed:  it  might  have  been  dark  green.  They  were  rather  too 
large  for  him.  He  then  went  into  his  study,  and  from  a  large 
strong-box  took  out  a  bundle  wrapped  in  old  cloths,  and  a 
leather-bound  manuscript;  and  also  a  large  bulky  envelope. 
The  book  and  bundle  he  stuffed  into  the  top  of  a  heavy  bag 
that  was  standing  there,  already  nearly  full.  Into  the  enve¬ 
lope  he  slipped  his  golden  ring,  and  its  fine  chain,  and  then 
sealed  it,  and  addressed  it  to  Frodo.  At  first  he  put  it  on  the 
mantelpiece,  but  suddenly  he  removed  it  and  stuck  it  in  his 
pocket.  At  that  moment  the  door  opened  and  Gandalf  came 
quickly  in. 

‘Hullo!’  said  Bilbo.  ‘I  wondered  if  you  would  turn  up.’ 

‘I  am  glad  to  find  you  visible,’  replied  the  wizard,  sitting 
down  in  a  chair,  ‘I  wanted  to  catch  you  and  have  a  few 


42 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


final  words.  I  suppose  you  feel  that  everything  has  gone  off 
splendidly  and  according  to  plan?’ 

‘Yes,  I  do,’  said  Bilbo.  ‘Though  that  flash  was  surprising: 
it  quite  startled  me,  let  alone  the  others.  A  little  addition  of 
your  own,  I  suppose?’ 

‘It  was.  You  have  wisely  kept  that  ring  secret  all  these  years, 
and  it  seemed  to  me  necessary  to  give  your  guests  something 
else  that  would  seem  to  explain  your  sudden  vanishment.’ 

‘And  would  spoil  my  joke.  You  are  an  interfering  old  busy¬ 
body,’  laughed  Bilbo,  ‘but  I  expect  you  know  best,  as  usual.’ 

‘I  do  -  when  I  know  anything.  But  I  don’t  feel  too  sure 
about  this  whole  affair.  It  has  now  come  to  the  final  point. 
You  have  had  your  joke,  and  alarmed  or  offended  most  of 
your  relations,  and  given  the  whole  Shire  something  to  talk 
about  for  nine  days,  or  ninety-nine  more  likely.  Are  you  going 
any  further?’ 

‘Yes,  I  am.  I  feel  I  need  a  holiday,  a  very  long  holiday,  as 
I  have  told  you  before.  Probably  a  permanent  holiday:  I  don’t 
expect  I  shall  return.  In  fact,  I  don’t  mean  to,  and  I  have 
made  all  arrangements. 

‘I  am  old,  Gandalf.  I  don’t  look  it,  but  I  am  beginning 
to  feel  it  in  my  heart  of  hearts.  Well-preserved  indeed!’  he 
snorted.  ‘Why,  I  feel  all  thin,  sort  of  stretched ,  if  you  know 
what  I  mean:  like  butter  that  has  been  scraped  over  too  much 
bread.  That  can’t  be  right.  I  need  a  change,  or  something.’ 

Gandalf  looked  curiously  and  closely  at  him.  ‘No,  it  does 
not  seem  right,’  he  said  thoughtfully.  ‘No,  after  all  I  believe 
your  plan  is  probably  the  best.’ 

‘Well,  I’ve  made  up  my  mind,  anyway.  I  want  to  see  moun¬ 
tains  again,  Gandalf  -  mountains',  and  then  find  somewhere 
where  I  can  rest.  In  peace  and  quiet,  without  a  lot  of  relatives 
prying  around,  and  a  string  of  confounded  visitors  hanging 
on  the  bell.  I  might  find  somewhere  where  I  can  finish  my 
book.  I  have  thought  of  a  nice  ending  for  it:  and  he  lived 
happily  ever  after  to  the  end  of  his  days’ 

Gandalf  laughed.  ‘I  hope  he  will.  But  nobody  will  read  the 
book,  however  it  ends.’ 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


43 


‘Oh,  they  may,  in  years  to  come.  Frodo  has  read  some 
already,  as  far  as  it  has  gone.  You’ll  keep  an  eye  on  Frodo, 
won’t  you?’ 

‘Yes,  I  will  -  two  eyes,  as  often  as  I  can  spare  them.’ 

‘Fie  would  come  with  me,  of  course,  if  I  asked  him.  In  fact 
he  offered  to  once,  just  before  the  party.  But  he  does  not 
really  want  to,  yet.  I  want  to  see  the  wild  country  again  before 
I  die,  and  the  Mountains;  but  he  is  still  in  love  with  the 
Shire,  with  woods  and  fields  and  little  rivers.  He  ought  to  be 
comfortable  here.  I  am  leaving  everything  to  him,  of  course, 
except  a  few  oddments.  I  hope  he  will  be  happy,  when  he 
gets  used  to  being  on  his  own.  It’s  time  he  was  his  own  master 
now.’ 

‘Everything?’  said  Gandalf.  ‘The  ring  as  well?  You  agreed 
to  that,  you  remember.’ 

‘Well,  er,  yes,  I  suppose  so,’  stammered  Bilbo. 

Where  is  it?’ 

‘In  an  envelope,  if  you  must  know,’  said  Bilbo  impatiently. 
‘There  on  the  mantelpiece.  Well,  no!  Here  it  is  in  my 
pocket!’  He  hesitated.  ‘Isn’t  that  odd  now?’  he  said  softly 
to  himself.  ‘Yet  after  all,  why  not?  Why  shouldn’t  it  stay 
there?’ 

Gandalf  looked  again  very  hard  at  Bilbo,  and  there  was  a 
gleam  in  his  eyes.  ‘I  think,  Bilbo,’  he  said  quietly,  ‘I  should 
leave  it  behind.  Don’t  you  want  to?’ 

Well  yes  -  and  no.  Now  it  comes  to  it,  I  don’t  like  parting 
with  it  at  all,  I  may  say.  And  I  don’t  really  see  why  I  should. 
Why  do  you  want  me  to?’  he  asked,  and  a  curious  change 
came  over  his  voice.  It  was  sharp  with  suspicion  and  annoy¬ 
ance.  ‘You  are  always  badgering  me  about  my  ring;  but  you 
have  never  bothered  me  about  the  other  things  that  I  got  on 
my  journey.’ 

‘No,  but  I  had  to  badger  you,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘I  wanted  the 
truth.  It  was  important.  Magic  rings  are  -  well,  magical;  and 
they  are  rare  and  curious.  I  was  professionally  interested  in 
your  ring,  you  may  say;  and  I  still  am.  I  should  like  to  know 
where  it  is,  if  you  go  wandering  again.  Also  I  think  you  have 


44 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


had  it  quite  long  enough.  You  won’t  need  it  any  more,  Bilbo, 
unless  I  am  quite  mistaken.’ 

Bilbo  flushed,  and  there  was  an  angry  light  in  his  eyes.  His 
kindly  face  grew  hard.  ‘Why  not?’  he  cried.  ‘And  what 
business  is  it  of  yours,  anyway,  to  know  what  I  do  with  my 
own  things?  It  is  my  own.  I  found  it.  It  came  to  me.’ 

‘Yes,  yes,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘But  there  is  no  need  to  get  angry.’ 

‘If  I  am  it  is  your  fault,’  said  Bilbo.  ‘It  is  mine,  I  tell  you. 
My  own.  My  Precious.  Yes,  my  Precious.’ 

The  wizard’s  face  remained  grave  and  attentive,  and  only 
a  flicker  in  his  deep  eyes  showed  that  he  was  startled  and 
indeed  alarmed.  ‘It  has  been  called  that  before,’  he  said,  ‘but 
not  by  you.’ 

‘But  I  say  it  now.  And  why  not?  Even  if  Gollum  said  the 
same  once.  It’s  not  his  now,  but  mine.  And  I  shall  keep  it,  I 
say.’ 

Gandalf  stood  up.  He  spoke  sternly.  ‘You  will  be  a  fool  if 
you  do,  Bilbo,’  he  said.  ‘You  make  that  clearer  with  every 
word  you  say.  It  has  got  far  too  much  hold  on  you.  Let  it  go! 
And  then  you  can  go  yourself,  and  be  free.’ 

‘I’ll  do  as  I  choose  and  go  as  I  please,’  said  Bilbo  obstinately. 

‘Now,  now,  my  dear  hobbit!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘All  your  long 
life  we  have  been  friends,  and  you  owe  me  something.  Come! 
Do  as  you  promised:  give  it  up!’ 

‘Well,  if  you  want  my  ring  yourself,  say  so!’  cried  Bilbo. 
‘But  you  won’t  get  it.  I  won’t  give  my  Precious  away,  I  tell 
you.’  His  hand  strayed  to  the  hilt  of  his  small  sword. 

Gandalf’s  eyes  flashed.  ‘It  will  be  my  turn  to  get  angry 
soon,’  he  said.  ‘If  you  say  that  again,  I  shall.  Then  you  will 
see  Gandalf  the  Grey  uncloaked.’  He  took  a  step  towards  the 
hobbit,  and  he  seemed  to  grow  tall  and  menacing;  his  shadow 
filled  the  little  room. 

Bilbo  backed  away  to  the  wall,  breathing  hard,  his  hand 
clutching  at  his  pocket.  They  stood  for  a  while  facing  one 
another,  and  the  air  of  the  room  tingled.  Gandalf’s  eyes 
remained  bent  on  the  hobbit.  Slowly  his  hands  relaxed,  and 
he  began  to  tremble. 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


45 


‘I  don’t  know  what  has  come  over  you,  Gandalf,’  he  said. 
‘You  have  never  been  like  this  before.  What  is  it  all  about?  It 
is  mine  isn’t  it?  I  found  it,  and  Gollum  would  have  killed  me, 
if  I  hadn’t  kept  it.  I’m  not  a  thief,  whatever  he  said.’ 

‘I  have  never  called  you  one,’  Gandalf  answered.  ‘And  I 
am  not  one  either.  I  am  not  trying  to  rob  you,  but  to  help 
you.  I  wish  you  would  trust  me,  as  you  used.’  He  turned 
away,  and  the  shadow  passed.  He  seemed  to  dwindle  again 
to  an  old  grey  man,  bent  and  troubled. 

Bilbo  drew  his  hand  over  his  eyes.  ‘I  am  sorry,’  he  said. 
‘But  I  felt  so  queer.  And  yet  it  would  be  a  relief  in  a  way  not 
to  be  bothered  with  it  any  more.  It  has  been  so  growing  on 
my  mind  lately.  Sometimes  I  have  felt  it  was  like  an  eye 
looking  at  me.  And  I  am  always  wanting  to  put  it  on  and 
disappear,  don’t  you  know;  or  wondering  if  it  is  safe,  and 
pulling  it  out  to  make  sure.  I  tried  locking  it  up,  but  I  found 
I  couldn’t  rest  without  it  in  my  pocket.  I  don’t  know  why. 
And  I  don’t  seem  able  to  make  up  my  mind.’ 

‘Then  trust  mine,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘It  is  quite  made  up.  Go 
away  and  leave  it  behind.  Stop  possessing  it.  Give  it  to  Frodo, 
and  I  will  look  after  him.’ 

Bilbo  stood  for  a  moment  tense  and  undecided.  Presently 
he  sighed.  ‘All  right,’  he  said  with  an  effort.  ‘I  will.’  Then  he 
shrugged  his  shoulders,  and  smiled  rather  ruefully.  ‘After  all 
that’s  what  this  party  business  was  all  about,  really:  to  give 
away  lots  of  birthday-presents,  and  somehow  make  it  easier 
to  give  it  away  at  the  same  time.  It  hasn’t  made  it  any  easier 
in  the  end,  but  it  would  be  a  pity  to  waste  all  my  preparations. 
It  would  quite  spoil  the  joke.’ 

‘Indeed  it  would  take  away  the  only  point  I  ever  saw  in  the 
affair,’  said  Gandalf. 

‘Very  well,’  said  Bilbo,  ‘it  goes  to  Frodo  with  all  the  rest.’ 
He  drew  a  deep  breath.  ‘And  now  I  really  must  be  starting, 
or  somebody  else  will  catch  me.  I  have  said  good-bye,  and  I 
couldn’t  bear  to  do  it  all  over  again.’  He  picked  up  his  bag 
and  moved  to  the  door. 

‘You  have  still  got  the  ring  in  your  pocket,’  said  the  wizard. 


46 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Well,  so  I  have!’  cried  Bilbo.  ‘And  my  will  and  all  the  other 
documents  too.  You  had  better  take  it  and  deliver  it  for  me. 
That  will  be  safest.’ 

‘No,  don’t  give  the  ring  to  me,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘Put  it  on  the 
mantelpiece.  It  will  be  safe  enough  there,  till  Frodo  comes.  I 
shall  wait  for  him.’ 

Bilbo  took  out  the  envelope,  but  just  as  he  was  about  to  set 
it  by  the  clock,  his  hand  jerked  back,  and  the  packet  fell  on 
the  floor.  Before  he  could  pick  it  up,  the  wizard  stooped  and 
seized  it  and  set  it  in  its  place.  A  spasm  of  anger  passed 
swiftly  over  the  hobbit’s  face  again.  Suddenly  it  gave  way  to 
a  look  of  relief  and  a  laugh. 

‘Well,  that’s  that,’  he  said.  ‘Now  I’m  off!’ 

They  went  out  into  the  hall.  Bilbo  chose  his  favourite  stick 
from  the  stand;  then  he  whistled.  Three  dwarves  came  out 
of  different  rooms  where  they  had  been  busy. 

‘Is  everything  ready?’  asked  Bilbo.  ‘Everything  packed  and 
labelled?’ 

‘Everything,’  they  answered. 

‘Well,  let’s  start  then!’  He  stepped  out  of  the  front-door. 

It  was  a  fine  night,  and  the  black  sky  was  dotted  with  stars. 
He  looked  up,  sniffing  the  air.  What  fun!  What  fun  to  be  off 
again,  off  on  the  Road  with  dwarves!  This  is  what  I  have 
really  been  longing  for,  for  years!  Good-bye!’  he  said,  looking 
at  his  old  home  and  bowing  to  the  door.  ‘Good-bye,  Gandalf!  ’ 

‘Good-bye,  for  the  present,  Bilbo.  Take  care  of  yourself! 
You  are  old  enough,  and  perhaps  wise  enough.’ 

‘Take  care!  I  don’t  care.  Don’t  you  worry  about  me!  I  am 
as  happy  now  as  I  have  ever  been,  and  that  is  saying  a  great 
deal.  But  the  time  has  come.  I  am  being  swept  off  my  feet  at 
last,’  he  added,  and  then  in  a  low  voice,  as  if  to  himself,  he 
sang  softly  in  the  dark: 

The  Road  goes  ever  on  and  on 
Down  from  the  door  where  it  began. 

Now  far  ahead  the  Road  has  gone, 

And  I  must  follow,  if  I  can, 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


47 


Pursuing  it  with  eager  feet, 

Until  it  joins  some  larger  way 
Where  many  paths  and  errands  meet. 

And  whither  then?  I  cannot  say. 

He  paused,  silent  for  a  moment.  Then  without  another  word 
he  turned  away  from  the  lights  and  voices  in  the  field  and 
tents,  and  followed  by  his  three  companions  went  round 
into  his  garden,  and  trotted  down  the  long  sloping  path.  He 
jumped  over  a  low  place  in  the  hedge  at  the  bottom,  and  took 
to  the  meadows,  passing  into  the  night  like  a  rustle  of  wind 
in  the  grass. 

Gandalf  remained  for  a  while  staring  after  him  into  the 
darkness.  ‘Good-bye,  my  dear  Bilbo  -  until  our  next  meet¬ 
ing!’  he  said  softly  and  went  back  indoors. 

Frodo  came  in  soon  afterwards,  and  found  him  sitting  in 
the  dark,  deep  in  thought.  ‘Has  he  gone?’  he  asked. 

‘Yes,’  answered  Gandalf,  ‘he  has  gone  at  last.’ 

‘I  wish  - 1  mean,  I  hoped  until  this  evening  that  it  was  only 
a  joke,’  said  Frodo.  ‘But  I  knew  in  my  heart  that  he  really 
meant  to  go.  He  always  used  to  joke  about  serious  things.  I 
wish  I  had  come  back  sooner,  just  to  see  him  off.’ 

‘I  think  really  he  preferred  slipping  off  quietly  in  the  end,’ 
said  Gandalf.  ‘Don’t  be  too  troubled.  He’ll  be  all  right  -  now. 
He  left  a  packet  for  you.  There  it  is!’ 

Frodo  took  the  envelope  from  the  mantelpiece,  and  glanced 
at  it,  but  did  not  open  it. 

‘You’ll  find  his  will  and  all  the  other  documents  in  there,  I 
think,’  said  the  wizard.  ‘You  are  the  master  of  Bag  End  now. 
And  also,  I  fancy,  you’ll  find  a  golden  ring.’ 

‘The  ring!’  exclaimed  Frodo.  ‘Has  he  left  me  that?  I  wonder 
why.  Still,  it  may  be  useful.’ 

‘It  may,  and  it  may  not,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘I  should  not  make 
use  of  it,  if  I  were  you.  But  keep  it  secret,  and  keep  it  safe! 
Now  I  am  going  to  bed.’ 

*  *  * 


48 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


As  master  of  Bag  End  Frodo  felt  it  his  painful  duty  to  say 
good-bye  to  the  guests.  Rumours  of  strange  events  had  by 
now  spread  all  over  the  field,  but  Frodo  would  only  say  no 
doubt  everything  will  be  cleared  up  in  the  morning.  About  mid¬ 
night  carriages  came  for  the  important  folk.  One  by  one 
they  rolled  away,  filled  with  full  but  very  unsatisfied  hobbits. 
Gardeners  came  by  arrangement,  and  removed  in  wheel¬ 
barrows  those  that  had  inadvertently  remained  behind. 

Night  slowly  passed.  The  sun  rose.  The  hobbits  rose  rather 
later.  Morning  went  on.  People  came  and  began  (by  orders) 
to  clear  away  the  pavilions  and  the  tables  and  the  chairs,  and 
the  spoons  and  knives  and  bottles  and  plates,  and  the  lanterns, 
and  the  flowering  shrubs  in  boxes,  and  the  crumbs  and 
cracker-paper,  the  forgotten  bags  and  gloves  and  handker¬ 
chiefs,  and  the  uneaten  food  (a  very  small  item).  Then  a 
number  of  other  people  came  (without  orders):  Bagginses, 
and  Boffins,  and  Bolgers,  and  Tooks,  and  other  guests  that 
lived  or  were  staying  near.  By  mid-day,  when  even  the  best- 
fed  were  out  and  about  again,  there  was  a  large  crowd  at  Bag 
End,  uninvited  but  not  unexpected. 

Frodo  was  waiting  on  the  step,  smiling,  but  looking  rather 
tired  and  worried.  He  welcomed  all  the  callers,  but  he  had 
not  much  more  to  say  than  before.  His  reply  to  all  inquiries 
was  simply  this:  ‘Air.  Bilbo  Baggins  has  gone  away;  as  far  as 
I  know,  for  good.’  Some  of  the  visitors  he  invited  to  come 
inside,  as  Bilbo  had  left  ‘messages’  for  them. 

Inside  in  the  hall  there  was  piled  a  large  assortment  of 
packages  and  parcels  and  small  articles  of  furniture.  On  every 
item  there  was  a  label  tied.  There  were  several  labels  of  this 
sort: 

ForADELARD  TO  OK,  for  his  VERY  OWN,  from  Bilbo',  on 
an  umbrella.  Adelard  had  carried  off  many  unlabelled  ones. 

For  DORA  BAGGINS  in  memory  of  a  LONG  correspon¬ 
dence,  with  love  from  Bilbo;  on  a  large  waste-paper  basket. 
Dora  was  Drogo’s  sister  and  the  eldest  surviving  female  rela¬ 
tive  of  Bilbo  and  Frodo;  she  was  ninety-nine,  and  had  written 
reams  of  good  advice  for  more  than  half  a  century. 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY  49 

For  MILO  BURROWS,  hoping  it  will  be  useful,  from  B.B.; 
on  a  gold  pen  and  ink-bottle.  Milo  never  answered  letters. 

For  ANGELICA’S  use,  from  Uncle  Bilbo ;  on  a  round  convex 
mirror.  She  was  a  young  Baggins,  and  too  obviously  con¬ 
sidered  her  face  shapely. 

For  the  collection  of  HUGO  BRACEGIRDLE,  from  a  con¬ 
tributor ;  on  an  (empty)  book-case.  Hugo  was  a  great  borrower 
of  books,  and  worse  than  usual  at  returning  them. 

For  LOBELIA  SACKVTI J E-BAGGTNS,  as  a  PRESENT, 
on  a  case  of  silver  spoons.  Bilbo  believed  that  she  had 
acquired  a  good  many  of  his  spoons,  while  he  was  away  on 
his  former  journey.  Lobelia  knew  that  quite  well.  When  she 
arrived  later  in  the  day,  she  took  the  point  at  once,  but  she 
also  took  the  spoons. 

This  is  only  a  small  selection  of  the  assembled  presents. 
Bilbo’s  residence  had  got  rather  cluttered  up  with  things  in 
the  course  of  his  long  life.  It  was  a  tendency  of  hobbit-holes 
to  get  cluttered  up:  for  which  the  custom  of  giving  so  many 
birthday-presents  was  largely  responsible.  Not,  of  course, 
that  the  birthday-presents  were  always  new;  there  were  one 
or  two  old  mathoms  of  forgotten  uses  that  had  circulated  all 
around  the  district;  but  Bilbo  had  usually  given  new  presents, 
and  kept  those  that  he  received.  The  old  hole  was  now  being 
cleared  a  little. 

Every  one  of  the  various  parting  gifts  had  labels,  written 
out  personally  by  Bilbo,  and  several  had  some  point,  or  some 
joke.  But,  of  course,  most  of  the  things  were  given  where 
they  would  be  wanted  and  welcome.  The  poorer  hobbits,  and 
especially  those  of  Bagshot  Row,  did  very  well.  Old  Gaffer 
Gamgee  got  two  sacks  of  potatoes,  a  new  spade,  a  woollen 
waistcoat,  and  a  bottle  of  ointment  for  creaking  joints.  Old 
Rory  Brandybuck,  in  return  for  much  hospitality,  got  a  dozen 
bottles  of  Old  Winyards:  a  strong  red  wine  from  the  South¬ 
farthing,  and  now  quite  mature,  as  it  had  been  laid  down  by 
Bilbo’s  father.  Rory  quite  forgave  Bilbo,  and  voted  him  a 
capital  fellow  after  the  first  bottle. 


50 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


There  was  plenty  of  everything  left  for  Frodo.  And,  of 
course,  all  the  chief  treasures,  as  well  as  the  books,  pictures, 
and  more  than  enough  furniture,  were  left  in  his  possession. 
There  was,  however,  no  sign  nor  mention  of  money  or  jewel¬ 
lery:  not  a  penny-piece  or  a  glass  bead  was  given  away. 

Frodo  had  a  very  trying  time  that  afternoon.  A  false  rumour 
that  the  whole  household  was  being  distributed  free  spread 
like  wildfire;  and  before  long  the  place  was  packed  with 
people  who  had  no  business  there,  but  could  not  be  kept  out. 
Labels  got  torn  off  and  mixed,  and  quarrels  broke  out.  Some 
people  tried  to  do  swaps  and  deals  in  the  hall;  and  others 
tried  to  make  off  with  minor  items  not  addressed  to  them,  or 
with  anything  that  seemed  unwanted  or  unwatched.  The  road 
to  the  gate  was  blocked  with  barrows  and  handcarts. 

In  the  middle  of  the  commotion  the  Sackville-Bagginses 
arrived.  Frodo  had  retired  for  a  while  and  left  his  friend 
Merry  Brandybuck  to  keep  an  eye  on  things.  When  Otho 
loudly  demanded  to  see  Frodo,  Merry  bowed  politely. 

‘He  is  indisposed,’  he  said.  ‘He  is  resting.’ 

‘Hiding,  you  mean,’  said  Lobelia.  ‘Anyway  we  want  to  see 
him  and  we  mean  to  see  him.  Just  go  and  tell  him  so!’ 

Merry  left  them  a  long  while  in  the  hall,  and  they  had  time 
to  discover  their  parting  gift  of  spoons.  It  did  not  improve 
their  tempers.  Eventually  they  were  shown  into  the  study. 
Frodo  was  sitting  at  a  table  with  a  lot  of  papers  in  front  of 
him.  He  looked  indisposed  -  to  see  Sackville-Bagginses  at 
any  rate;  and  he  stood  up,  fidgeting  with  something  in  his 
pocket.  But  he  spoke  quite  politely. 

The  Sackville-Bagginses  were  rather  offensive.  They  began 
by  offering  him  bad  bargain-prices  (as  between  friends)  for 
various  valuable  and  unlabelled  things.  When  Frodo  replied 
that  only  the  things  specially  directed  by  Bilbo  were  being 
given  away,  they  said  the  whole  affair  was  very  fishy. 

‘Only  one  thing  is  clear  to  me,’  said  Otho,  ‘and  that  is  that 
you  are  doing  exceedingly  well  out  of  it.  I  insist  on  seeing 
the  will.’ 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


51 


Otho  would  have  been  Bilbo’s  heir,  but  for  the  adoption 
of  Frodo.  He  read  the  will  carefully  and  snorted.  It  was, 
unfortunately,  very  clear  and  correct  (according  to  the  legal 
customs  of  hobbits,  which  demand  among  other  things  seven 
signatures  of  witnesses  in  red  ink) . 

‘Foiled  again!’  he  said  to  his  wife.  ‘And  after  waiting  sixty 
years.  Spoons?  Fiddlesticks!’  He  snapped  his  fingers  under 
Frodo’s  nose  and  stumped  off.  But  Lobelia  was  not  so  easily 
got  rid  of.  A  little  later  Frodo  came  out  of  the  study  to  see 
how  things  were  going  on,  and  found  her  still  about  the  place, 
investigating  nooks  and  corners,  and  tapping  the  floors.  He 
escorted  her  firmly  off  the  premises,  after  he  had  relieved 
her  of  several  small  (but  rather  valuable)  articles  that  had 
somehow  fallen  inside  her  umbrella.  Her  face  looked  as  if  she 
was  in  the  throes  of  thinking  out  a  really  crushing  parting 
remark;  but  all  she  found  to  say,  turning  round  on  the  step, 
was: 

‘You’ll  five  to  regret  it,  young  fellow!  Why  didn’t  you  go 
too?  You  don’t  belong  here;  you’re  no  Baggins  -  you  -  you’re 
a  Brandybuck!’ 

‘Did  you  hear  that,  Merry?  That  was  an  insult,  if  you  like,’ 
said  Frodo  as  he  shut  the  door  on  her. 

‘It  was  a  compliment,’  said  Merry  Brandybuck,  ‘and  so,  of 
course,  not  true.’ 

Then  they  went  round  the  hole,  and  evicted  three  young 
hobbits  (two  Boffins  and  a  Bolger)  who  were  knocking  holes 
in  the  walls  of  one  of  the  cellars.  Frodo  also  had  a  tussle  with 
young  Sancho  Proudfoot  (old  Odo  Proudfoot’s  grandson), 
who  had  begun  an  excavation  in  the  larger  pantry,  where  he 
thought  there  was  an  echo.  The  legend  of  Bilbo’s  gold  excited 
both  curiosity  and  hope;  for  legendary  gold  (mysteriously 
obtained,  if  not  positively  ill-gotten),  is,  as  everyone  knows, 
anyone’s  for  the  finding  -  unless  the  search  is  interrupted. 

When  he  had  overcome  Sancho  and  pushed  him  out, 
Frodo  collapsed  on  a  chair  in  the  hall.  ‘It’s  time  to  close  the 
shop,  Merry,’  he  said.  ‘Lock  the  door,  and  don’t  open  it  to 


52 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


anyone  today,  not  even  if  they  bring  a  battering  ram.’  Then 
he  went  to  revive  himself  with  a  belated  cup  of  tea. 

He  had  hardly  sat  down,  when  there  came  a  soft  knock  at 
the  front-door.  ‘Lobelia  again  most  likely,’  he  thought.  ‘She 
must  have  thought  of  something  really  nasty,  and  have  come 
back  again  to  say  it.  It  can  wait.’ 

He  went  on  with  his  tea.  The  knock  was  repeated,  much 
louder,  but  he  took  no  notice.  Suddenly  the  wizard’s  head 
appeared  at  the  window. 

‘If  you  don’t  let  me  in,  Frodo,  I  shall  blow  your  door  right 
down  your  hole  and  out  through  the  hill,’  he  said. 

‘My  dear  Gandalf!  Half  a  minute!’  cried  Frodo,  running 
out  of  the  room  to  the  door.  ‘Come  in!  Come  in!  I  thought  it 
was  Lobelia.’ 

‘Then  I  forgive  you.  But  I  saw  her  some  time  ago,  driving 
a  pony-trap  towards  Bywater  with  a  face  that  would  have 
curdled  new  milk.’ 

‘She  had  already  nearly  curdled  me.  Honestly,  I  nearly 
tried  on  Bilbo’s  ring.  I  longed  to  disappear.’ 

‘Don’t  do  that!’  said  Gandalf,  sitting  down.  ‘Do  be  careful 
of  that  ring,  Frodo!  In  fact,  it  is  partly  about  that  that  I  have 
come  to  say  a  last  word.’ 

‘Well,  what  about  it?’ 

‘What  do  you  know  already?’ 

‘Only  what  Bilbo  told  me.  I  have  heard  his  story:  how  he 
found  it,  and  how  he  used  it:  on  his  journey,  I  mean.’ 

Which  story,  I  wonder,’  said  Gandalf. 

‘Oh,  not  what  he  told  the  dwarves  and  put  in  his  book,’ 
said  Frodo.  ‘He  told  me  the  true  story  soon  after  I  came 
to  live  here.  He  said  you  had  pestered  him  till  he  told 
you,  so  I  had  better  know  too.  “No  secrets  between  us, 
Frodo,”  he  said;  “but  they  are  not  to  go  any  further.  It’s  mine 
anyway.”  ’ 

‘That’s  interesting,’  said  Gandalf.  Well,  what  did  you  think 
of  it  all?’ 

‘If  you  mean,  inventing  all  that  about  a  “present”,  well,  I 
thought  the  true  story  much  more  likely,  and  I  couldn’t  see 


A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY  53 

the  point  of  altering  it  at  all.  It  was  very  unlike  Bilbo  to  do 
so,  anyway;  and  I  thought  it  rather  odd.’ 

‘So  did  I.  But  odd  things  may  happen  to  people  that  have 
such  treasures  -  if  they  use  them.  Let  it  be  a  warning  to  you 
to  be  very  careful  with  it.  It  may  have  other  powers  than  just 
making  you  vanish  when  you  wish  to.’ 

‘I  don’t  understand,’  said  Frodo. 

‘Neither  do  I,’  answered  the  wizard.  ‘I  have  merely  begun 
to  wonder  about  the  ring,  especially  since  last  night.  No  need 
to  worry.  But  if  you  take  my  advice  you  will  use  it  very 
seldom,  or  not  at  all.  At  least  I  beg  you  not  to  use  it  in  any 
way  that  will  cause  talk  or  rouse  suspicion.  I  say  again:  keep 
it  safe,  and  keep  it  secret!  ’ 

‘You  are  very  mysterious!  What  are  you  afraid  of?’ 

‘I  am  not  certain,  so  I  will  say  no  more.  I  may  be  able  to 
tell  you  something  when  I  come  back.  I  am  going  off  at  once: 
so  this  is  good-bye  for  the  present.’  He  got  up. 

‘At  once!’  cried  Frodo.  ‘Why,  I  thought  you  were  staying 
on  for  at  least  a  week.  I  was  looking  forward  to  your  help.’ 

‘I  did  mean  to  -  but  I  have  had  to  change  my  mind.  I  may 
be  away  for  a  good  while;  but  I’ll  come  and  see  you  again,  as 
soon  as  I  can.  Expect  me  when  you  see  me!  I  shall  slip  in 
quietly.  I  shan’t  often  be  visiting  the  Shire  openly  again.  I 
find  that  I  have  become  rather  unpopular.  They  say  I  am  a 
nuisance  and  a  disturber  of  the  peace.  Some  people  are  actu¬ 
ally  accusing  me  of  spiriting  Bilbo  away,  or  worse.  If  you 
want  to  know,  there  is  supposed  to  be  a  plot  between  you 
and  me  to  get  hold  of  his  wealth.’ 

‘Some  people!’  exclaimed  Frodo.  ‘You  mean  Otho  and 
Lobelia.  How  abominable!  I  would  give  them  Bag  End  and 
everything  else,  if  I  could  get  Bilbo  back  and  go  off  tramping 
in  the  country  with  him.  I  love  the  Shire.  But  I  begin  to  wish, 
somehow,  that  I  had  gone  too.  I  wonder  if  I  shall  ever  see 
him  again.’ 

‘So  do  I,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘And  I  wonder  many  other  things. 
Good-bye  now!  Take  care  of  yourself!  Look  out  for  me, 
especially  at  unlikely  times!  Good-bye!’ 


54 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Frodo  saw  him  to  the  door.  He  gave  a  final  wave  of  his 
hand,  and  walked  off  at  a  surprising  pace;  but  Frodo  thought 
the  old  wizard  looked  unusually  bent,  almost  as  if  he  was 
carrying  a  great  weight.  The  evening  was  closing  in,  and  his 
cloaked  figure  quickly  vanished  into  the  twilight.  Frodo  did 
not  see  him  again  for  a  long  time. 


Chapter  2 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


The  talk  did  not  die  down  in  nine  or  even  ninety-nine  days. 
The  second  disappearance  of  Mr.  Bilbo  Baggins  was  dis¬ 
cussed  in  Hobbiton,  and  indeed  all  over  the  Shire,  for  a  year 
and  a  day,  and  was  remembered  much  longer  than  that.  It 
became  a  fireside-story  for  young  hobbits;  and  eventually 
Mad  Baggins,  who  used  to  vanish  with  a  bang  and  a  flash 
and  reappear  with  bags  of  jewels  and  gold,  became  a  favourite 
character  of  legend  and  lived  on  long  after  all  the  true  events 
were  forgotten. 

But  in  the  meantime,  the  general  opinion  in  the  neighbour¬ 
hood  was  that  Bilbo,  who  had  always  been  rather  cracked, 
had  at  last  gone  quite  mad,  and  had  run  off  into  the  Blue. 
There  he  had  undoubtedly  fallen  into  a  pool  or  a  river  and 
come  to  a  tragic,  but  hardly  an  untimely,  end.  The  blame 
was  mostly  laid  on  Gandalf. 

‘If  only  that  dratted  wizard  will  leave  young  Frodo  alone, 
perhaps  he’ll  settle  down  and  grow  some  hobbit-sense,’  they 
said.  And  to  all  appearance  the  wizard  did  leave  Frodo  alone, 
and  he  did  settle  down,  but  the  growth  of  hobbit-sense  was 
not  very  noticeable.  Indeed,  he  at  once  began  to  carry  on 
Bilbo’s  reputation  for  oddity.  He  refused  to  go  into  mourning; 
and  the  next  year  he  gave  a  party  in  honour  of  Bilbo’s 
hundred-and-twelfth  birthday,  which  he  called  a  Hundred¬ 
weight  Feast.  But  that  was  short  of  the  mark,  for  twenty 
guests  were  invited  and  there  were  several  meals  at  which  it 
snowed  food  and  rained  drink,  as  hobbits  say. 

Some  people  were  rather  shocked;  but  Frodo  kept  up  the 
custom  of  giving  Bilbo’s  Birthday  Party  year  after  year  until 
they  got  used  to  it.  He  said  that  he  did  not  think  Bilbo  was 


56 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


dead.  When  they  asked:  Where  is  he  then?’  he  shrugged  his 
shoulders. 

He  lived  alone,  as  Bilbo  had  done;  but  he  had  a  good 
many  friends,  especially  among  the  younger  hobbits  (mostly 
descendants  of  the  Old  Took)  who  had  as  children  been  fond 
of  Bilbo  and  often  in  and  out  of  Bag  End.  Folco  Boffin  and 
Fredegar  Bolger  were  two  of  these;  but  his  closest  friends 
were  Peregrin  Took  (usually  called  Pippin),  and  Merry 
Brandybuck  (his  real  name  was  Meriadoc,  but  that  was 
seldom  remembered).  Frodo  went  tramping  over  the  Shire 
with  them;  but  more  often  he  wandered  by  himself,  and  to 
the  amazement  of  sensible  folk  he  was  sometimes  seen  far 
from  home  walking  in  the  hills  and  woods  under  the  starlight. 
Merry  and  Pippin  suspected  that  he  visited  the  Elves  at  times, 
as  Bilbo  had  done. 

As  time  went  on,  people  began  to  notice  that  Frodo  also 
showed  signs  of  good  ‘preservation’:  outwardly  he  retained 
the  appearance  of  a  robust  and  energetic  hobbit  just  out  of 
his  tweens.  ‘Some  folk  have  all  the  luck,’  they  said;  but  it  was 
not  until  Frodo  approached  the  usually  more  sober  age  of 
fifty  that  they  began  to  think  it  queer. 

Frodo  himself,  after  the  first  shock,  found  that  being  his  own 
master  and  the  Mr.  Baggins  of  Bag  End  was  rather  pleasant. 
For  some  years  he  was  quite  happy  and  did  not  worry  much 
about  the  future.  But  half  unknown  to  himself  the  regret  that 
he  had  not  gone  with  Bilbo  was  steadily  growing.  He  found 
himself  wondering  at  times,  especially  in  the  autumn,  about 
the  wild  lands,  and  strange  visions  of  mountains  that  he  had 
never  seen  came  into  his  dreams.  He  began  to  say  to  himself: 
‘Perhaps  I  shall  cross  the  River  myself  one  day.’  To  which 
the  other  half  of  his  mind  always  replied:  ‘Not  yet.’ 

So  it  went  on,  until  his  forties  were  running  out,  and  his 
fiftieth  birthday  was  drawing  near:  fifty  was  a  number  that 
he  felt  was  somehow  significant  (or  ominous) ;  it  was  at  any 
rate  at  that  age  that  adventure  had  suddenly  befallen  Bilbo. 
Frodo  began  to  feel  restless,  and  the  old  paths  seemed  too 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


57 


well-trodden.  He  looked  at  maps,  and  wondered  what  lay 
beyond  their  edges:  maps  made  in  the  Shire  showed  mostly 
white  spaces  beyond  its  borders.  He  took  to  wandering 
further  afield  and  more  often  by  himself;  and  Merry  and 
his  other  friends  watched  him  anxiously.  Often  he  was  seen 
walking  and  talking  with  the  strange  wayfarers  that  began  at 
this  time  to  appear  in  the  Shire. 

There  were  rumours  of  strange  things  happening  in  the 
world  outside;  and  as  Gandalf  had  not  at  that  time  appeared  or 
sent  any  message  for  several  years,  Frodo  gathered  all  the  news 
he  could.  Elves,  who  seldom  walked  in  the  Shire,  could  now 
be  seen  passing  westward  through  the  woods  in  the  evening, 
passing  and  not  returning;  but  they  were  leaving  Middle-earth 
and  were  no  longer  concerned  with  its  troubles.  There  were, 
however,  dwarves  on  the  road  in  unusual  numbers.  The 
ancient  East-West  Road  ran  through  the  Shire  to  its  end  at  the 
Grey  Havens,  and  dwarves  had  always  used  it  on  their  way  to 
their  mines  in  the  Blue  Mountains.  They  were  the  hobbits’ 
chief  source  of  news  from  distant  parts  -  if  they  wanted  any:  as 
a  rule  dwarves  said  little  and  hobbits  asked  no  more.  But  now 
Frodo  often  met  strange  dwarves  of  far  countries,  seeking 
refuge  in  the  West.  They  were  troubled,  and  some  spoke  in 
whispers  of  the  Enemy  and  of  the  Land  of  Mordor. 

That  name  the  hobbits  only  knew  in  legends  of  the  dark 
past,  like  a  shadow  in  the  background  of  their  memories;  but 
it  was  ominous  and  disquieting.  It  seemed  that  the  evil  power 
in  Mirkwood  had  been  driven  out  by  the  White  Council 
only  to  reappear  in  greater  strength  in  the  old  strongholds  of 
Mordor.  The  Dark  Tower  had  been  rebuilt,  it  was  said.  From 
there  the  power  was  spreading  far  and  wide,  and  away  far 
east  and  south  there  were  wars  and  growing  fear.  Ores  were 
multiplying  again  in  the  mountains.  Trolls  were  abroad,  no 
longer  dull-witted,  but  cunning  and  armed  with  dreadful 
weapons.  And  there  were  murmured  hints  of  creatures  more 
terrible  than  all  these,  but  they  had  no  name. 


5§ 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Little  of  all  this,  of  course,  reached  the  ears  of  ordinary 
hobbits.  But  even  the  deafest  and  most  stay-at-home  began 
to  hear  queer  tales;  and  those  whose  business  took  them  to  the 
borders  saw  strange  things.  The  conversation  in  The  Green 
Dragon  at  Bywater,  one  evening  in  the  spring  of  Frodo’s 
fiftieth  year,  showed  that  even  in  the  comfortable  heart  of  the 
Shire  rumours  had  been  heard,  though  most  hobbits  still 
laughed  at  them. 

Sam  Gamgee  was  sitting  in  one  corner  near  the  fire,  and 
opposite  him  was  Ted  Sandyman,  the  miller’s  son;  and  there 
were  various  other  rustic  hobbits  listening  to  their  talk. 

‘Queer  things  you  do  hear  these  days,  to  be  sure,’  said  Sam. 

‘Ah,’  said  Ted,  ‘you  do,  if  you  listen.  But  I  can  hear  fireside- 
tales  and  children’s  stories  at  home,  if  I  want  to.’ 

‘No  doubt  you  can,’  retorted  Sam,  ‘and  I  daresay  there’s 
more  truth  in  some  of  them  than  you  reckon.  Who  invented 
the  stories  anyway?  Take  dragons  now.’ 

‘No  thank  ’ee,’  said  Ted,  ‘I  won’t.  I  heard  tell  of  them 
when  I  was  a  youngster,  but  there’s  no  call  to  believe  in  them 
now.  There’s  only  one  Dragon  in  Bywater,  and  that’s  Green,’ 
he  said,  getting  a  general  laugh. 

‘All  right,’  said  Sam,  laughing  with  the  rest.  ‘But  what 
about  these  Tree-men,  these  giants,  as  you  might  call  them? 
They  do  say  that  one  bigger  than  a  tree  was  seen  up  away 
beyond  the  North  Moors  not  long  back.’ 

‘Who’s  they? 

‘My  cousin  Hal  for  one.  He  works  for  Mr.  Boffin  at 
Overhill  and  goes  up  to  the  Northfarthing  for  the  hunting. 
He  saw  one.’ 

‘Says  he  did,  perhaps.  Your  Hal’s  always  saying  he’s  seen 
things;  and  maybe  he  sees  things  that  ain’t  there.’ 

‘But  this  one  was  as  big  as  an  elm  tree,  and  walking  - 
walking  seven  yards  to  a  stride,  if  it  was  an  inch.’ 

‘Then  I  bet  it  wasn’t  an  inch.  What  he  saw  was  an  elm  tree, 
as  like  as  not.’ 

‘But  this  one  was  walking ,  I  tell  you;  and  there  ain’t  no  elm 
tree  on  the  North  Moors.’ 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


59 


‘Then  Hal  can’t  have  seen  one,’  said  Ted.  There  was  some 
laughing  and  clapping:  the  audience  seemed  to  think  that 
Ted  had  scored  a  point. 

‘All  the  same,’  said  Sam,  ‘you  can’t  deny  that  others  besides 
our  Halfast  have  seen  queer  folk  crossing  the  Shire  -  crossing 
it,  mind  you:  there  are  more  that  are  turned  back  at  the 
borders.  The  Bounders  have  never  been  so  busy  before. 

‘And  I’ve  heard  tell  that  Elves  are  moving  west.  They  do 
say  they  are  going  to  the  harbours,  out  away  beyond  the 
White  Towers.’  Sam  waved  his  arm  vaguely:  neither  he  nor 
any  of  them  knew  how  far  it  was  to  the  Sea,  past  the  old 
towers  beyond  the  western  borders  of  the  Shire.  But  it  was 
an  old  tradition  that  away  over  there  stood  the  Grey  Havens, 
from  which  at  times  elven-ships  set  sail,  never  to  return. 

‘They  are  sailing,  sailing,  sailing  over  the  Sea,  they  are 
going  into  the  West  and  leaving  us,’  said  Sam,  half  chanting 
the  words,  shaking  his  head  sadly  and  solemnly.  But  Ted 
laughed. 

‘Well,  that  isn’t  anything  new,  if  you  believe  the  old  tales. 
And  I  don’t  see  what  it  matters  to  me  or  you.  Let  them  sail! 
But  I  warrant  you  haven’t  seen  them  doing  it;  nor  anyone 
else  in  the  Shire.’ 

‘Well,  I  don’t  know,’  said  Sam  thoughtfully.  He  believed 
he  had  once  seen  an  Elf  in  the  woods,  and  still  hoped  to  see 
more  one  day.  Of  all  the  legends  that  he  had  heard  in  his 
early  years  such  fragments  of  tales  and  half-remembered 
stories  about  the  Elves  as  the  hobbits  knew,  had  always  moved 
him  most  deeply.  ‘There  are  some,  even  in  these  parts,  as 
know  the  Fair  Folk  and  get  news  of  them,’  he  said.  ‘There’s 
Mr.  Baggins  now,  that  I  work  for.  He  told  me  that  they  were 
sailing  and  he  knows  a  bit  about  Elves.  And  old  Mr.  Bilbo  knew 
more:  many’s  the  talk  I  had  with  him  when  I  was  a  little  lad.’ 

‘Oh,  they’re  both  cracked,’  said  Ted.  ‘Leastways  old  Bilbo 
was  cracked,  and  Frodo’s  cracking.  If  that’s  where  you  get 
your  news  from,  you’ll  never  want  for  moonshine.  Well, 
friends,  I’m  off  home.  Your  good  health!’  He  drained  his 
mug  and  went  out  noisily. 


6o 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Sam  sat  silent  and  said  no  more.  He  had  a  good  deal  to 
think  about.  For  one  thing,  there  was  a  lot  to  do  up  in  the 
Bag  End  garden,  and  he  would  have  a  busy  day  tomorrow, 
if  the  weather  cleared.  The  grass  was  growing  fast.  But  Sam 
had  more  on  his  mind  than  gardening.  After  a  while  he 
sighed,  and  got  up  and  went  out. 

It  was  early  April  and  the  sky  was  now  clearing  after  heavy 
rain.  The  sun  was  down,  and  a  cool  pale  evening  was  quietly 
fading  into  night.  He  walked  home  under  the  early  stars 
through  Hobbiton  and  up  the  Hill,  whistling  softly  and 
thoughtfully. 

It  was  just  at  this  time  that  Gandalf  reappeared  after  his  long 
absence.  For  three  years  after  the  Party  he  had  been  away. 
Then  he  paid  Frodo  a  brief  visit,  and  after  taking  a  good  look 
at  him  he  went  off  again.  During  the  next  year  or  two  he  had 
turned  up  fairly  often,  coming  unexpectedly  after  dusk,  and 
going  off  without  warning  before  sunrise.  He  would  not 
discuss  his  own  business  and  journeys,  and  seemed  chiefly 
interested  in  small  news  about  Frodo’s  health  and  doings. 

Then  suddenly  his  visits  had  ceased.  It  was  over  nine  years 
since  Frodo  had  seen  or  heard  of  him,  and  he  had  begun  to 
think  that  the  wizard  would  never  return  and  had  given  up 
all  interest  in  hobbits.  But  that  evening,  as  Sam  was  walking 
home  and  twilight  was  fading,  there  came  the  once  familiar 
tap  on  the  study  window. 

Frodo  welcomed  his  old  friend  with  surprise  and  great 
delight.  They  looked  hard  at  one  another. 

‘All  well  eh?’  said  Gandalf.  ‘You  look  the  same  as  ever, 
Frodo!’ 

‘So  do  you,’  Frodo  replied;  but  secretly  he  thought  that 
Gandalf  looked  older  and  more  careworn.  He  pressed  him 
for  news  of  himself  and  of  the  wide  world,  and  soon  they 
were  deep  in  talk,  and  they  stayed  up  far  into  the  night. 

Next  morning  after  a  late  breakfast,  the  wizard  was  sitting 
with  Frodo  by  the  open  window  of  the  study.  A  bright  fire 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


6l 


was  on  the  hearth,  but  the  sun  was  warm,  and  the  wind  was 
in  the  South.  Everything  looked  fresh,  and  the  new  green  of 
spring  was  shimmering  in  the  fields  and  on  the  tips  of  the 
trees’  fingers. 

Gandalf  was  thinking  of  a  spring,  nearly  eighty  years 
before,  when  Bilbo  had  run  out  of  Bag  End  without  a  hand¬ 
kerchief.  His  hair  was  perhaps  whiter  than  it  had  been  then, 
and  his  beard  and  eyebrows  were  perhaps  longer,  and  his 
face  more  lined  with  care  and  wisdom;  but  his  eyes  were  as 
bright  as  ever,  and  he  smoked  and  blew  smoke-rings  with  the 
same  vigour  and  delight. 

He  was  smoking  now  in  silence,  for  Frodo  was  sitting  still, 
deep  in  thought.  Even  in  the  light  of  morning  he  felt  the  dark 
shadow  of  the  tidings  that  Gandalf  had  brought.  At  last  he 
broke  the  silence. 

‘Last  night  you  began  to  tell  me  strange  things  about  my 
ring,  Gandalf,’  he  said.  ‘And  then  you  stopped,  because  you 
said  that  such  matters  were  best  left  until  daylight.  Don’t  you 
think  you  had  better  finish  now?  You  say  the  ring  is  danger¬ 
ous,  far  more  dangerous  than  I  guess.  In  what  way?’ 

‘In  many  ways,’  answered  the  wizard.  ‘It  is  far  more  power¬ 
ful  than  I  ever  dared  to  think  at  first,  so  powerful  that  in  the 
end  it  would  utterly  overcome  anyone  of  mortal  race  who 
possessed  it.  It  would  possess  him. 

‘In  Eregion  long  ago  many  Elven-rings  were  made,  magic 
rings  as  you  call  them,  and  they  were,  of  course,  of  various 
kinds:  some  more  potent  and  some  less.  The  lesser  rings  were 
only  essays  in  the  craft  before  it  was  full-grown,  and  to  the 
Elven-smiths  they  were  but  trifles  -  yet  still  to  my  mind 
dangerous  for  mortals.  But  the  Great  Rings,  the  Rings  of 
Power,  they  were  perilous. 

‘A  mortal,  Frodo,  who  keeps  one  of  the  Great  Rings,  does 
not  die,  but  he  does  not  grow  or  obtain  more  life,  he  merely 
continues,  until  at  last  every  minute  is  a  weariness.  And  if 
he  often  uses  the  Ring  to  make  himself  invisible,  he  fades',  he 
becomes  in  the  end  invisible  permanently,  and  walks  in  the 
twilight  under  the  eye  of  the  Dark  Power  that  rules  the  Rings. 


62 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Y es,  sooner  or  later  -  later,  if  he  is  strong  or  well-meaning  to 
begin  with,  but  neither  strength  nor  good  purpose  will  last  - 
sooner  or  later  the  Dark  Power  will  devour  him.’ 

‘How  terrifying!’  said  Frodo.  There  was  another  long 
silence.  The  sound  of  Sam  Gamgee  cutting  the  lawn  came 
in  from  the  garden. 

‘How  long  have  you  known  this?’  asked  Frodo  at  length. 
‘And  how  much  did  Bilbo  know?’ 

‘Bilbo  knew  no  more  than  he  told  you,  I  am  sure,’  said 
Gandalf.  ‘He  would  certainly  never  have  passed  on  to  you 
anything  that  he  thought  would  be  a  danger,  even  though  I 
promised  to  look  after  you.  He  thought  the  ring  was  very 
beautiful,  and  very  useful  at  need;  and  if  anything  was  wrong 
or  queer,  it  was  himself.  He  said  that  it  was  “growing  on  his 
mind”,  and  he  was  always  worrying  about  it;  but  he  did  not 
suspect  that  the  ring  itself  was  to  blame.  Though  he  had 
found  out  that  the  thing  needed  looking  after;  it  did  not  seem 
always  of  the  same  size  or  weight;  it  shrank  or  expanded  in 
an  odd  way,  and  might  suddenly  slip  off  a  finger  where  it 
had  been  tight.’ 

‘Yes,  he  warned  me  of  that  in  his  last  letter,’  said  Frodo, 
‘so  I  have  always  kept  it  on  its  chain.’ 

‘Very  wise,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘But  as  for  his  long  life,  Bilbo 
never  connected  it  with  the  ring  at  all.  He  took  all  the  credit 
for  that  to  himself,  and  he  was  very  proud  of  it.  Though  he 
was  getting  restless  and  uneasy.  Thin  and  stretched  he  said. 
A  sign  that  the  ring  was  getting  control.’ 

‘How  long  have  you  known  all  this?’  asked  Frodo  again. 

‘Known?’  said  Gandalf.  ‘I  have  known  much  that  only  the 
Wise  know,  Frodo.  But  if  you  mean  “known  about  this  ring”, 
well,  I  still  do  not  know ,  one  might  say.  There  is  a  last  test  to 
make.  But  I  no  longer  doubt  my  guess. 

‘When  did  I  first  begin  to  guess?’  he  mused,  searching  back 
in  memory.  ‘Let  me  see  -  it  was  in  the  year  that  the  White 
Council  drove  the  Dark  Power  from  Mirkwood,  just  before 
the  Battle  of  Five  Armies,  that  Bilbo  found  his  ring.  A  shadow 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


63 


fell  on  my  heart  then,  though  I  did  not  know  yet  what  I 
feared.  I  wondered  often  how  Gollum  came  by  a  Great  Ring, 
as  plainly  it  was  -  that  at  least  was  clear  from  the  first.  Then 
I  heard  Bilbo’s  strange  story  of  how  he  had  “won”  it,  and  I 
could  not  believe  it.  When  I  at  last  got  the  truth  out  of  him, 
I  saw  at  once  that  he  had  been  trying  to  put  his  claim  to  the 
ring  beyond  doubt.  Much  like  Gollum  with  his  “birthday- 
present”.  The  lies  were  too  much  alike  for  my  comfort. 
Clearly  the  ring  had  an  unwholesome  power  that  set  to  work 
on  its  keeper  at  once.  That  was  the  first  real  warning  I  had 
that  all  was  not  well.  I  told  Bilbo  often  that  such  rings  were 
better  left  unused;  but  he  resented  it,  and  soon  got  angry. 
There  was  little  else  that  I  could  do.  I  could  not  take  it  from 
him  without  doing  greater  harm;  and  I  had  no  right  to  do  so 
anyway.  I  could  only  watch  and  wait.  I  might  perhaps  have 
consulted  Saruman  the  White,  but  something  always  held 
me  back.’ 

Who  is  he?’  asked  Frodo.  ‘I  have  never  heard  of  him 
before.’ 

‘Maybe  not,’  answered  Gandalf.  ‘Hobbits  are,  or  were,  no 
concern  of  his.  Yet  he  is  great  among  the  Wise.  He  is  the 
chief  of  my  order  and  the  head  of  the  Council.  His  knowledge 
is  deep,  but  his  pride  has  grown  with  it,  and  he  takes  ill  any 
meddling.  The  lore  of  the  Elven-rings,  great  and  small,  is  his 
province.  He  has  long  studied  it,  seeking  the  lost  secrets  of 
their  making;  but  when  the  Rings  were  debated  in  the  Coun¬ 
cil,  all  that  he  would  reveal  to  us  of  his  ring-lore  told  against 
my  fears.  So  my  doubt  slept  -  but  uneasily.  Still  I  watched 
and  I  waited. 

‘And  all  seemed  well  with  Bilbo.  And  the  years  passed. 
Yes,  they  passed,  and  they  seemed  not  to  touch  him.  He 
showed  no  signs  of  age.  The  shadow  fell  on  me  again.  But  I 
said  to  myself:  “After  all  he  comes  of  a  long-lived  family  on 
his  mother’s  side.  There  is  time  yet.  Wait!” 

‘And  I  waited.  Until  that  night  when  he  left  this  house.  He 
said  and  did  things  then  that  filled  me  with  a  fear  that  no 
words  of  Saruman  could  allay.  I  knew  at  last  that  something 


64 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


dark  and  deadly  was  at  work.  And  I  have  spent  most  of  the 
years  since  then  in  finding  out  the  truth  of  it.’ 

‘There  wasn’t  any  permanent  harm  done,  was  there?’  asked 
Frodo  anxiously.  ‘He  would  get  all  right  in  time,  wouldn’t 
he?  Be  able  to  rest  in  peace,  I  mean?’ 

‘He  felt  better  at  once,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘But  there  is  only  one 
Power  in  this  world  that  knows  all  about  the  Rings  and  their 
effects;  and  as  far  as  I  know  there  is  no  Power  in  the  world 
that  knows  all  about  hobbits.  Among  the  Wise  I  am  the 
only  one  that  goes  in  for  hobbit-lore:  an  obscure  branch  of 
knowledge,  but  full  of  surprises.  Soft  as  butter  they  can  be, 
and  yet  sometimes  as  tough  as  old  tree-roots.  I  think  it  likely 
that  some  would  resist  the  Rings  far  longer  than  most  of 
the  Wise  would  believe.  I  don’t  think  you  need  worry  about 
Bilbo. 

‘Of  course,  he  possessed  the  ring  for  many  years,  and  used 
it,  so  it  might  take  a  long  while  for  the  influence  to  wear  off 
-  before  it  was  safe  for  him  to  see  it  again,  for  instance. 
Otherwise,  he  might  live  on  for  years,  quite  happily:  just  stop 
as  he  was  when  he  parted  with  it.  For  he  gave  it  up  in  the 
end  of  his  own  accord:  an  important  point.  No,  I  was  not 
troubled  about  dear  Bilbo  any  more,  once  he  had  let  the  thing 
go.  It  is  for  you  that  I  feel  responsible. 

‘Ever  since  Bilbo  left  I  have  been  deeply  concerned  about 
you,  and  about  all  these  charming,  absurd,  helpless  hobbits. 
It  would  be  a  grievous  blow  to  the  world,  if  the  Dark  Power 
overcame  the  Shire;  if  all  your  kind,  jolly,  stupid  Bolgers, 
Hornblowers,  Boffins,  Bracegirdles,  and  the  rest,  not  to 
mention  the  ridiculous  Bagginses,  became  enslaved.’ 

Frodo  shuddered.  ‘But  why  should  we  be?’  he  asked.  ‘And 
why  should  he  want  such  slaves?’ 

‘To  tell  you  the  truth,’  replied  Gandalf,  ‘I  believe  that 
hitherto  -  hitherto ,  mark  you  -  he  has  entirely  overlooked 
the  existence  of  hobbits.  You  should  be  thankful.  But  your 
safety  has  passed.  He  does  not  need  you  -  he  has  many 
more  useful  servants  -  but  he  won’t  forget  you  again.  And 
hobbits  as  miserable  slaves  would  please  him  far  more  than 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST  65 

hobbits  happy  and  free.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  malice  and 
revenge.’ 

‘Revenge?’  said  Frodo.  ‘Revenge  for  what?  I  still  don’t 
understand  what  all  this  has  to  do  with  Bilbo  and  myself,  and 
our  ring.’ 

‘It  has  everything  to  do  with  it,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘You  do  not 
know  the  real  peril  yet;  but  you  shall.  I  was  not  sure  of  it 
myself  when  I  was  last  here;  but  the  time  has  come  to  speak. 
Give  me  the  ring  for  a  moment.’ 

Frodo  took  it  from  his  breeches-pocket,  where  it  was 
clasped  to  a  chain  that  hung  from  his  belt.  Fie  unfastened  it 
and  handed  it  slowly  to  the  wizard.  It  felt  suddenly  very 
heavy,  as  if  either  it  or  Frodo  himself  was  in  some  way  reluc¬ 
tant  for  Gandalf  to  touch  it. 

Gandalf  held  it  up.  It  looked  to  be  made  of  pure  and  solid 
gold.  ‘Can  you  see  any  markings  on  it?’  he  asked. 

‘No,’  said  Frodo.  ‘There  are  none.  It  is  quite  plain,  and  it 
never  shows  a  scratch  or  sign  of  wear.’ 

‘Well  then,  look!’  To  Frodo’s  astonishment  and  distress 
the  wizard  threw  it  suddenly  into  the  middle  of  a  glowing 
corner  of  the  fire.  Frodo  gave  a  cry  and  groped  for  the  tongs; 
but  Gandalf  held  him  back. 

‘Wait!’  he  said  in  a  commanding  voice,  giving  Frodo  a 
quick  look  from  under  his  bristling  brows. 

No  apparent  change  came  over  the  ring.  After  a  while 
Gandalf  got  up,  closed  the  shutters  outside  the  window,  and 
drew  the  curtains.  The  room  became  dark  and  silent,  though 
the  clack  of  Sam’s  shears,  now  nearer  to  the  windows,  could 
still  be  heard  faintly  from  the  garden.  For  a  moment  the 
wizard  stood  looking  at  the  fire;  then  he  stooped  and  removed 
the  ring  to  the  hearth  with  the  tongs,  and  at  once  picked  it 
up.  Frodo  gasped. 

‘It  is  quite  cool,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘Take  it!’  Frodo  received  it 
on  his  shrinking  palm:  it  seemed  to  have  become  thicker  and 
heavier  than  ever. 

‘Hold  it  up!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘And  look  closely!’ 


66 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


As  Frodo  did  so,  he  now  saw  fine  lines,  finer  than  the  finest 
pen-strokes,  running  along  the  ring,  outside  and  inside:  lines 
of  fire  that  seemed  to  form  the  letters  of  a  flowing  script. 
They  shone  piercingly  bright,  and  yet  remote,  as  if  out  of  a 
great  depth. 


‘I  cannot  read  the  fiery  letters,’  said  Frodo  in  a  quavering 
voice. 

‘No,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘but  I  can.  The  letters  are  Elvish,  of  an 
ancient  mode,  but  the  language  is  that  of  Mordor,  which  I 
will  not  utter  here.  But  this  in  the  Common  Tongue  is  what 
is  said,  close  enough: 

One  Ring  to  rule  them  all.  One  Ring  to  find,  them, 

One  Ring  to  bring  them  all  and  in  the  darkness  bind  them. 

It  is  only  two  lines  of  a  verse  long  known  in  Elven-lore: 

Three  Rings  for  the  Elven-kings  under  the  sky, 

Seven  for  the  Dwarf-lords  in  their  halls  of  stone, 

Nine  for  Mortal  Men  doomed  to  die, 

One  for  the  Dark  Lord  on  his  dark  throne 
In  the  Land  of  Mordor  where  the  Shadows  lie. 

One  Ring  to  rule  them  all,  One  Ring  to  find  them, 

One  Ring  to  bring  them  all  and  in  the  darkness  bind  them 
In  the  Land  of  Mordor  where  the  Shadows  lied 

He  paused,  and  then  said  slowly  in  a  deep  voice:  ‘This  is 
the  Master-ring,  the  One  Ring  to  rule  them  all.  This  is  the 
One  Ring  that  he  lost  many  ages  ago,  to  the  great  weakening 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


67 


of  his  power.  He  greatly  desires  it  -  but  he  must  not  get  it.’ 

Frodo  sat  silent  and  motionless.  Fear  seemed  to  stretch  out 
a  vast  hand,  like  a  dark  cloud  rising  in  the  East  and  looming 
up  to  engulf  him.  ‘This  ring!’  he  stammered.  ‘How,  how  on 
earth  did  it  come  to  me?’ 

‘Ah!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘That  is  a  very  long  story.  The  begin¬ 
nings  lie  back  in  the  Black  Years,  which  only  the  lore-masters 
now  remember.  If  I  were  to  tell  you  all  that  tale,  we  should 
still  be  sitting  here  when  Spring  had  passed  into  Winter. 

‘But  last  night  I  told  you  of  Sauron  the  Great,  the  Dark 
Lord.  The  rumours  that  you  have  heard  are  true:  he  has 
indeed  arisen  again  and  left  his  hold  in  Mirkwood  and 
returned  to  his  ancient  fastness  in  the  Dark  Tower  of  Mordor. 
That  name  even  you  hobbits  have  heard  of,  like  a  shadow  on 
the  borders  of  old  stories.  Always  after  a  defeat  and  a  respite, 
the  Shadow  takes  another  shape  and  grows  again.’ 

‘I  wish  it  need  not  have  happened  in  my  time,’  said  Frodo. 

‘So  do  I,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘and  so  do  all  who  live  to  see  such 
times.  But  that  is  not  for  them  to  decide.  All  we  have  to 
decide  is  what  to  do  with  the  time  that  is  given  us.  And 
already,  Frodo,  our  time  is  beginning  to  look  black.  The 
Enemy  is  fast  becoming  very  strong.  His  plans  are  far  from 
ripe,  I  think,  but  they  are  ripening.  We  shall  be  hard  put  to 
it.  We  should  be  very  hard  put  to  it,  even  if  it  were  not  for 
this  dreadful  chance. 

‘The  Enemy  still  lacks  one  thing  to  give  him  strength  and 
knowledge  to  beat  down  all  resistance,  break  the  last  defences, 
and  cover  all  the  lands  in  a  second  darkness.  He  lacks  the 
One  Ring. 

‘The  Three,  fairest  of  all,  the  Elf-lords  hid  from  him,  and 
his  hand  never  touched  them  or  sullied  them.  Seven  the 
Dwarf-kings  possessed,  but  three  he  has  recovered,  and  the 
others  the  dragons  have  consumed.  Nine  he  gave  to  Mortal 
Men,  proud  and  great,  and  so  ensnared  them.  Long  ago 
they  fell  under  the  dominion  of  the  One,  and  they  became 
Ringwraiths,  shadows  under  his  great  Shadow,  his  most 


68 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


terrible  servants.  Long  ago.  It  is  many  a  year  since  the  Nine 
walked  abroad.  Yet  who  knows?  As  the  Shadow  grows  once 
more,  they  too  may  walk  again.  But  come!  We  will  not  speak 
of  such  things  even  in  the  morning  of  the  Shire. 

‘So  it  is  now:  the  Nine  he  has  gathered  to  himself;  the 
Seven  also,  or  else  they  are  destroyed.  The  Three  are  hidden 
still.  But  that  no  longer  troubles  him.  He  only  needs  the  One; 
for  he  made  that  Ring  himself,  it  is  his,  and  he  let  a  great  part 
of  his  own  former  power  pass  into  it,  so  that  he  could  rule  all 
the  others.  If  he  recovers  it,  then  he  will  command  them  all 
again,  wherever  they  be,  even  the  Three,  and  all  that  has 
been  wrought  with  them  will  be  laid  bare,  and  he  will  be 
stronger  than  ever. 

‘And  this  is  the  dreadful  chance,  Frodo.  He  believed  that 
the  One  had  perished;  that  the  Elves  had  destroyed  it,  as 
should  have  been  done.  But  he  knows  now  that  it  has  not 
perished,  that  it  has  been  found.  So  he  is  seeking  it,  seeking 
it,  and  all  his  thought  is  bent  on  it.  It  is  his  great  hope  and 
our  great  fear.’ 

‘Why,  why  wasn’t  it  destroyed?’  cried  Frodo.  ‘And  how 
did  the  Enemy  ever  come  to  lose  it,  if  he  was  so  strong,  and 
it  was  so  precious  to  him?’  He  clutched  the  Ring  in  his  hand, 
as  if  he  saw  already  dark  fingers  stretching  out  to  seize  it. 

‘It  was  taken  from  him,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘The  strength  of 
the  Elves  to  resist  him  was  greater  long  ago;  and  not  all 
Men  were  estranged  from  them.  The  Men  of  Westernesse 
came  to  their  aid.  That  is  a  chapter  of  ancient  history 
which  it  might  be  good  to  recall;  for  there  was  sorrow  then 
too,  and  gathering  dark,  but  great  valour,  and  great  deeds 
that  were  not  wholly  vain.  One  day,  perhaps,  I  will  tell  you 
all  the  tale,  or  you  shall  hear  it  told  in  full  by  one  who  knows 
it  best. 

‘But  for  the  moment,  since  most  of  all  you  need  to  know 
how  this  thing  came  to  you,  and  that  will  be  tale  enough,  this 
is  all  that  I  will  say.  It  was  Gil-galad,  Elven-king  and  Elendil  of 
Westernesse  who  overthrew  Sauron,  though  they  themselves 
perished  in  the  deed;  and  Isildur  Elendil’s  son  cut  the  Ring 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


69 


from  Sauron’s  hand  and  took  it  for  his  own.  Then  Sauron 
was  vanquished  and  his  spirit  fled  and  was  hidden  for  long 
years,  until  his  shadow  took  shape  again  in  Mirkwood. 

‘But  the  Ring  was  lost.  It  fell  into  the  Great  River,  Anduin, 
and  vanished.  For  Isildur  was  marching  north  along  the  east 
banks  of  the  River,  and  near  the  Gladden  Fields  he  was 
waylaid  by  the  Ores  of  the  Mountains,  and  almost  all  his  folk 
were  slain.  He  leaped  into  the  waters,  but  the  Ring  slipped 
from  his  finger  as  he  swam,  and  then  the  Ores  saw  him  and 
killed  him  with  arrows.’ 

Gandalf  paused.  ‘And  there  in  the  dark  pools  amid  the 
Gladden  Fields,’  he  said,  ‘the  Ring  passed  out  of  knowledge 
and  legend;  and  even  so  much  of  its  history  is  known  now 
only  to  a  few,  and  the  Council  of  the  Wise  could  discover  no 
more.  But  at  last  I  can  carry  on  the  story,  I  think. 

‘Long  after,  but  still  very  long  ago,  there  lived  by  the  banks 
of  the  Great  River  on  the  edge  of  Wilderland  a  clever-handed 
and  quiet-footed  little  people.  I  guess  they  were  of  hobbit- 
kind;  akin  to  the  fathers  of  the  fathers  of  the  Stoors,  for  they 
loved  the  River,  and  often  swam  in  it,  or  made  little  boats  of 
reeds.  There  was  among  them  a  family  of  high  repute,  for  it 
was  large  and  wealthier  than  most,  and  it  was  ruled  by  a 
grandmother  of  the  folk,  stern  and  wise  in  old  lore,  such  as 
they  had.  The  most  inquisitive  and  curious-minded  of  that 
family  was  called  Smeagol.  He  was  interested  in  roots  and 
beginnings;  he  dived  into  deep  pools;  he  burrowed  under 
trees  and  growing  plants;  he  tunnelled  into  green  mounds; 
and  he  ceased  to  look  up  at  the  hill-tops,  or  the  leaves  on 
trees,  or  the  flowers  opening  in  the  air:  his  head  and  his  eyes 
were  downward. 

‘He  had  a  friend  called  Deagol,  of  similar  sort,  sharper¬ 
eyed  but  not  so  quick  and  strong.  On  a  time  they  took  a  boat 
and  went  down  to  the  Gladden  Fields,  where  there  were  great 
beds  of  iris  and  flowering  reeds.  There  Smeagol  got  out  and 
went  nosing  about  the  banks  but  Deagol  sat  in  the  boat  and 
fished.  Suddenly  a  great  fish  took  his  hook,  and  before  he 


70 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


knew  where  he  was,  he  was  dragged  out  and  down  into  the 
water,  to  the  bottom.  Then  he  let  go  of  his  line,  for  he  thought 
he  saw  something  shining  in  the  river-bed;  and  holding  his 
breath  he  grabbed  at  it. 

‘Then  up  he  came  spluttering,  with  weeds  in  his  hair  and 
a  handful  of  mud;  and  he  swam  to  the  bank.  And  behold! 
when  he  washed  the  mud  away,  there  in  his  hand  lay  a  beauti¬ 
ful  golden  ring;  and  it  shone  and  glittered  in  the  sun,  so  that 
his  heart  was  glad.  But  Smeagol  had  been  watching  him  from 
behind  a  tree,  and  as  Deagol  gloated  over  the  ring,  Smeagol 
came  softly  up  behind. 

‘  “Give  us  that,  Deagol,  my  love,”  said  Smeagol,  over  his 
friend’s  shoulder. 

‘  “Why?”  said  Deagol. 

‘  “Because  it’s  my  birthday,  my  love,  and  I  wants  it,”  said 
Smeagol. 

‘  “I  don’t  care,”  said  Deagol.  “I  have  given  you  a  present 
already,  more  than  I  could  afford.  I  found  this,  and  I’m  going 
to  keep  it.” 

‘  “Oh,  are  you  indeed,  my  love,”  said  Smeagol;  and  he 
caught  Deagol  by  the  throat  and  strangled  him,  because  the 
gold  looked  so  bright  and  beautiful.  Then  he  put  the  ring  on 
his  finger. 

‘No  one  ever  found  out  what  had  become  of  Deagol;  he 
was  murdered  far  from  home,  and  his  body  was  cunningly 
hidden.  But  Smeagol  returned  alone;  and  he  found  that  none 
of  his  family  could  see  him,  when  he  was  wearing  the  ring. 
He  was  very  pleased  with  his  discovery  and  he  concealed  it; 
and  he  used  it  to  find  out  secrets,  and  he  put  his  knowledge 
to  crooked  and  malicious  uses.  He  became  sharp-eyed  and 
keen-eared  for  all  that  was  hurtful.  The  ring  had  given  him 
power  according  to  his  stature.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at 
that  he  became  very  unpopular  and  was  shunned  (when  vis¬ 
ible)  by  all  his  relations.  They  kicked  him,  and  he  bit  their 
feet.  He  took  to  thieving,  and  going  about  muttering  to  him¬ 
self,  and  gurgling  in  his  throat.  So  they  called  him  Golhim, 
and  cursed  him,  and  told  him  to  go  far  away;  and  his  grand- 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST  71 

mother,  desiring  peace,  expelled  him  from  the  family  and 
turned  him  out  of  her  hole. 

‘He  wandered  in  loneliness,  weeping  a  little  for  the  hard¬ 
ness  of  the  world,  and  he  journeyed  up  the  River,  till  he  came 
to  a  stream  that  flowed  down  from  the  mountains,  and  he 
went  that  way.  He  caught  fish  in  deep  pools  with  invisible 
fingers  and  ate  them  raw.  One  day  it  was  very  hot,  and  as  he 
was  bending  over  a  pool,  he  felt  a  burning  on  the  back  of  his 
head,  and  a  dazzling  light  from  the  water  pained  his  wet  eyes. 
He  wondered  at  it,  for  he  had  almost  forgotten  about  the 
Sun.  Then  for  the  last  time  he  looked  up  and  shook  his  fist 
at  her. 

‘But  as  he  lowered  his  eyes,  he  saw  far  ahead  the  tops  of 
the  Misty  Mountains,  out  of  which  the  stream  came.  And  he 
thought  suddenly:  “It  would  be  cool  and  shady  under  those 
mountains.  The  Sun  could  not  watch  me  there.  The  roots  of 
those  mountains  must  be  roots  indeed;  there  must  be  great 
secrets  buried  there  which  have  not  been  discovered  since 
the  beginning.” 

‘So  he  journeyed  by  night  up  into  the  highlands,  and  he 
found  a  little  cave  out  of  which  the  dark  stream  ran;  and  he 
wormed  his  way  like  a  maggot  into  the  heart  of  the  hills, 
and  vanished  out  of  all  knowledge.  The  Ring  went  into  the 
shadows  with  him,  and  even  the  maker,  when  his  power  had 
begun  to  grow  again,  could  learn  nothing  of  it.’ 

‘Gollum!’  cried  Frodo.  ‘Gollum?  Do  you  mean  that  this  is 
the  very  Gollum-creature  that  Bilbo  met?  How  loathsome!’ 

‘I  think  it  is  a  sad  story,’  said  the  wizard,  ‘and  it  might  have 
happened  to  others,  even  to  some  hobbits  that  I  have  known.’ 

‘I  can’t  believe  that  Gollum  was  connected  with  hobbits, 
however  distantly,’  said  Frodo  with  some  heat.  ‘What  an 
abominable  notion!’ 

‘It  is  true  all  the  same,’  replied  Gandalf.  ‘About  their 
origins,  at  any  rate,  I  know  more  than  hobbits  do  themselves. 
And  even  Bilbo’s  story  suggests  the  kinship.  There  was  a 
great  deal  in  the  background  of  their  minds  and  memories 


72 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


that  was  very  similar.  They  understood  one  another  remark¬ 
ably  well,  very  much  better  than  a  hobbit  would  understand, 
say,  a  Dwarf,  or  an  Ore,  or  even  an  Elf.  Think  of  the  riddles 
they  both  knew,  for  one  thing.’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Frodo.  ‘Though  other  folks  besides  hobbits  ask 
riddles,  and  of  much  the  same  sort.  And  hobbits  don’t  cheat. 
Gollum  meant  to  cheat  all  the  time.  He  was  just  trying  to 
put  poor  Bilbo  off  his  guard.  And  I  daresay  it  amused  his 
wickedness  to  start  a  game  which  might  end  in  providing  him 
with  an  easy  victim,  but  if  he  lost  would  not  hurt  him.’ 

‘Only  too  true,  I  fear,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘But  there  was  some¬ 
thing  else  in  it,  I  think,  which  you  don’t  see  yet.  Even  Gollum 
was  not  wholly  ruined.  He  had  proved  tougher  than  even  one 
of  the  Wise  would  have  guessed  -  as  a  hobbit  might.  There 
was  a  little  corner  of  his  mind  that  was  still  his  own,  and  light 
came  through  it,  as  through  a  chink  in  the  dark:  light  out  of 
the  past.  It  was  actually  pleasant,  I  think,  to  hear  a  kindly 
voice  again,  bringing  up  memories  of  wind,  and  trees,  and 
sun  on  the  grass,  and  such  forgotten  things. 

‘But  that,  of  course,  would  only  make  the  evil  part  of  him 
angrier  in  the  end  -  unless  it  could  be  conquered.  Unless  it 
could  be  cured.’  Gandalf  sighed.  ‘Alas!  there  is  little  hope  of 
that  for  him.  Yet  not  no  hope.  No,  not  though  he  possessed 
the  Ring  so  long,  almost  as  far  back  as  he  can  remember.  For 
it  was  long  since  he  had  worn  it  much:  in  the  black  darkness 
it  was  seldom  needed.  Certainly  he  had  never  “faded”.  He  is 
thin  and  tough  still.  But  the  thing  was  eating  up  his  mind,  of 
course,  and  the  torment  had  become  almost  unbearable. 

‘All  the  “great  secrets”  under  the  mountains  had  turned 
out  to  be  just  empty  night:  there  was  nothing  more  to  find  out, 
nothing  worth  doing,  only  nasty  furtive  eating  and  resentful 
remembering.  He  was  altogether  wretched.  He  hated  the 
dark,  and  he  hated  light  more:  he  hated  everything,  and  the 
Ring  most  of  all.’ 

‘What  do  you  mean?’  said  Frodo.  ‘Surely  the  Ring  was  his 
Precious  and  the  only  thing  he  cared  for?  But  if  he  hated  it, 
why  didn’t  he  get  rid  of  it,  or  go  away  and  leave  it?’ 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


73 


‘You  ought  to  begin  to  understand,  Frodo,  after  all  you 
have  heard,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘He  hated  it  and  loved  it,  as  he 
hated  and  loved  himself.  He  could  not  get  rid  of  it.  He  had 
no  will  left  in  the  matter. 

‘A  Ring  of  Power  looks  after  itself,  Frodo.  It  may  slip  off 
treacherously,  but  its  keeper  never  abandons  it.  At  most  he 
plays  with  the  idea  of  handing  it  on  to  someone  else’s  care  - 
and  that  only  at  an  early  stage,  when  it  first  begins  to  grip. 
But  as  far  as  I  know  Bilbo  alone  in  history  has  ever  gone 
beyond  playing,  and  really  done  it.  He  needed  all  my  help, 
too.  And  even  so  he  would  never  have  just  forsaken  it,  or  cast 
it  aside.  It  was  not  Gollum,  Frodo,  but  the  Ring  itself  that 
decided  things.  The  Ring  left  him.’ 

‘What,  just  in  time  to  meet  Bilbo?’  said  Frodo.  ‘Wouldn’t 
an  Ore  have  suited  it  better?’ 

‘It  is  no  laughing  matter,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘Not  for  you.  It 
was  the  strangest  event  in  the  whole  history  of  the  Ring  so 
far:  Bilbo’s  arrival  just  at  that  time,  and  putting  his  hand  on 
it,  blindly,  in  the  dark. 

‘There  was  more  than  one  power  at  work,  Frodo.  The 
Ring  was  trying  to  get  back  to  its  master.  It  had  slipped  from 
Isildur’s  hand  and  betrayed  him;  then  when  a  chance  came 
it  caught  poor  Deagol,  and  he  was  murdered;  and  after  that 
Gollum,  and  it  had  devoured  him.  It  could  make  no  further 
use  of  him:  he  was  too  small  and  mean;  and  as  long  as  it 
stayed  with  him  he  would  never  leave  his  deep  pool  again. 
So  now,  when  its  master  was  awake  once  more  and  sending 
out  his  dark  thought  from  Mirkwood,  it  abandoned  Gollum. 
Only  to  be  picked  up  by  the  most  unlikely  person  imaginable: 
Bilbo  from  the  Shire! 

‘Behind  that  there  was  something  else  at  work,  beyond  any 
design  of  the  Ring-maker.  I  can  put  it  no  plainer  than  by 
saying  that  Bilbo  was  meant  to  find  the  Ring,  and  not  by  its 
maker.  In  which  case  you  also  were  meant  to  have  it.  And 
that  may  be  an  encouraging  thought.’ 

‘It  is  not,’  said  Frodo.  ‘Though  I  am  not  sure  that  I  under¬ 
stand  you.  But  how  have  you  learned  all  this  about  the  Ring, 


74 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


and  about  Gollum?  Do  you  really  know  it  all,  or  are  you  just 
guessing  still?’ 

Gandalf  looked  at  Frodo,  and  his  eyes  glinted.  ‘I  knew 
much  and  I  have  learned  much,’  he  answered.  ‘But  I  am  not 
going  to  give  an  account  of  all  my  doings  to  you.  The  history 
of  Elendil  and  Isildur  and  the  One  Ring  is  known  to  all  the 
Wise.  Your  ring  is  shown  to  be  that  One  Ring  by  the  fire¬ 
writing  alone,  apart  from  any  other  evidence.’ 

‘And  when  did  you  discover  that?’  asked  Frodo,  inter¬ 
rupting. 

‘Just  now  in  this  room,  of  course,’  answered  the  wizard 
sharply.  ‘But  I  expected  to  find  it.  I  have  come  back  from 
dark  journeys  and  long  search  to  make  that  final  test.  It  is  the 
last  proof,  and  all  is  now  only  too  clear.  Making  out  Gollum’s 
part,  and  fitting  it  into  the  gap  in  the  history,  required  some 
thought.  I  may  have  started  with  guesses  about  Gollum,  but 
I  am  not  guessing  now.  I  know.  I  have  seen  him.’ 

‘You  have  seen  Gollum?’  exclaimed  Frodo  in  amazement. 

‘Yes.  The  obvious  thing  to  do,  of  course,  if  one  could.  I 
tried  long  ago;  but  I  have  managed  it  at  last.’ 

‘Then  what  happened  after  Bilbo  escaped  from  him?  Do 
you  know  that?’ 

‘Not  so  clearly.  What  I  have  told  you  is  what  Gollum  was 
willing  to  tell  -  though  not,  of  course,  in  the  way  I  have 
reported  it.  Gollum  is  a  liar,  and  you  have  to  sift  his  words. 
For  instance,  he  called  the  Ring  his  “birthday-present”,  and 
he  stuck  to  that.  He  said  it  came  from  his  grandmother,  who 
had  lots  of  beautiful  things  of  that  kind.  A  ridiculous  story.  I 
have  no  doubt  that  Smeagol’s  grandmother  was  a  matriarch, 
a  great  person  in  her  way,  but  to  talk  of  her  possessing  many 
Elven-rings  was  absurd,  and  as  for  giving  them  away,  it  was 
a  lie.  But  a  lie  with  a  grain  of  truth. 

‘The  murder  of  Deagol  haunted  Gollum,  and  he  had  made 
up  a  defence,  repeating  it  to  his  “Precious”  over  and  over 
again,  as  he  gnawed  bones  in  the  dark,  until  he  almost 
believed  it.  It  was  his  birthday.  Deagol  ought  to  have  given 
the  ring  to  him.  It  had  obviously  turned  up  just  so  as  to  be 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


75 


a  present.  It  was  his  birthday-present,  and  so  on,  and  on. 

‘I  endured  him  as  long  as  I  could,  but  the  truth  was  desper¬ 
ately  important,  and  in  the  end  I  had  to  be  harsh.  I  put  the 
fear  of  fire  on  him,  and  wrung  the  true  story  out  of  him,  bit  by 
bit,  together  with  much  snivelling  and  snarling.  He  thought  he 
was  misunderstood  and  ill-used.  But  when  he  had  at  last  told 
me  his  history,  as  far  as  the  end  of  the  Riddle-game  and 
Bilbo’s  escape,  he  would  not  say  any  more,  except  in  dark 
hints.  Some  other  fear  was  on  him  greater  than  mine.  He 
muttered  that  he  was  going  to  get  his  own  back.  People  would 
see  if  he  would  stand  being  kicked,  and  driven  into  a  hole 
and  then  robbed.  Gollum  had  good  friends  now,  good  friends 
and  very  strong.  They  would  help  him.  Baggins  would  pay 
for  it.  That  was  his  chief  thought.  He  hated  Bilbo  and  cursed 
his  name.  What  is  more,  he  knew  where  he  came  from.’ 

‘But  how  did  he  find  that  out?’  asked  Frodo. 

‘Well,  as  for  the  name,  Bilbo  very  foolishly  told  Gollum 
himself;  and  after  that  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  discover 
his  country,  once  Gollum  came  out.  Oh  yes,  he  came  out. 
His  longing  for  the  Ring  proved  stronger  than  his  fear  of 
the  Ores,  or  even  of  the  light.  After  a  year  or  two  he  left  the 
mountains.  You  see,  though  still  bound  by  desire  of  it,  the 
Ring  was  no  longer  devouring  him;  he  began  to  revive  a  little. 
He  felt  old,  terribly  old,  yet  less  timid,  and  he  was  mortally 
hungry. 

‘Light,  light  of  Sun  and  Moon,  he  still  feared  and  hated, 
and  he  always  will,  I  think;  but  he  was  cunning.  He  found  he 
could  hide  from  daylight  and  moonshine,  and  make  his  way 
swiftly  and  softly  by  dead  of  night  with  his  pale  cold  eyes, 
and  catch  small  frightened  or  unwary  things.  He  grew 
stronger  and  bolder  with  new  food  and  new  air.  He  found 
his  way  into  Mirkwood,  as  one  would  expect.  ’ 

‘Is  that  where  you  found  him?’  asked  Frodo. 

‘I  saw  him  there,’  answered  Gandalf,  ‘but  before  that  he 
had  wandered  far,  following  Bilbo’s  trail.  It  was  difficult  to 
learn  anything  from  him  for  certain,  for  his  talk  was  con¬ 
stantly  interrupted  by  curses  and  threats.  “What  had  it  got 


76 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


in  its  pocketses?”  he  said.  “It  wouldn’t  say,  no  precious.  Little 
cheat.  Not  a  fair  question.  It  cheated  first,  it  did.  It  broke  the 
rules.  We  ought  to  have  squeezed  it,  yes  precious.  And  we 
will,  precious!” 

‘That  is  a  sample  of  his  talk.  I  don’t  suppose  you  want  any 
more.  I  had  weary  days  of  it.  But  from  hints  dropped  among 
the  snarls  I  gathered  that  his  padding  feet  had  taken  him  at 
last  to  Esgaroth,  and  even  to  the  streets  of  Dale,  listening 
secretly  and  peering.  Well,  the  news  of  the  great  events  went 
far  and  wide  in  Wilderland,  and  many  had  heard  Bilbo’s 
name  and  knew  where  he  came  from.  We  had  made  no  secret 
of  our  return  journey  to  his  home  in  the  West.  Gollum’s 
sharp  ears  would  soon  learn  what  he  wanted.’ 

‘Then  why  didn’t  he  track  Bilbo  further?’  asked  Frodo. 
Why  didn’t  he  come  to  the  Shire?’ 

‘Ah,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘now  we  come  to  it.  I  think  Gollum 
tried  to.  He  set  out  and  came  back  westward,  as  far  as  the 
Great  River.  But  then  he  turned  aside.  He  was  not  daunted 
by  the  distance,  I  am  sure.  No,  something  else  drew  him 
away.  So  my  friends  think,  those  that  hunted  him  for  me. 

‘The  Wood-elves  tracked  him  first,  an  easy  task  for  them, 
for  his  trail  was  still  fresh  then.  Through  Mirkwood  and  back 
again  it  led  them,  though  they  never  caught  him.  The  wood 
was  full  of  the  rumour  of  him,  dreadful  tales  even  among 
beasts  and  birds.  The  Woodmen  said  that  there  was  some 
new  terror  abroad,  a  ghost  that  drank  blood.  It  climbed  trees 
to  find  nests;  it  crept  into  holes  to  find  the  young;  it  slipped 
through  windows  to  find  cradles. 

‘But  at  the  western  edge  of  Mirkwood  the  trail  turned 
away.  It  wandered  off  southwards  and  passed  out  of  the 
Wood-elves’  ken,  and  was  lost.  And  then  I  made  a  great 
mistake.  Yes,  Frodo,  and  not  the  first;  though  I  fear  it  may 
prove  the  worst.  I  let  the  matter  be.  I  let  him  go;  for  I  had 
much  else  to  think  of  at  that  time,  and  I  still  trusted  the  lore 
of  Saruman. 

‘Well,  that  was  years  ago.  I  have  paid  for  it  since  with  many 
dark  and  dangerous  days.  The  trail  was  long  cold  when  I 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


77 


took  it  up  again,  after  Bilbo  left  here.  And  my  search  would 
have  been  in  vain,  but  for  the  help  that  I  had  from  a  friend: 
Aragorn,  the  greatest  traveller  and  huntsman  of  this  age  of 
the  world.  Together  we  sought  for  Gollum  down  the  whole 
length  of  Wilderland,  without  hope,  and  without  success.  But 
at  last,  when  I  had  given  up  the  chase  and  turned  to  other 
paths,  Gollum  was  found.  My  friend  returned  out  of  great 
perils  bringing  the  miserable  creature  with  him. 

‘What  he  had  been  doing  he  would  not  say.  He  only  wept 
and  called  us  cruel,  with  many  a  gollum  in  his  throat;  and 
when  we  pressed  him  he  whined  and  cringed,  and  rubbed 
his  long  hands,  licking  his  fingers  as  if  they  pained  him,  as  if 
he  remembered  some  old  torture.  But  I  am  afraid  there  is  no 
possible  doubt:  he  had  made  his  slow,  sneaking  way,  step  by 
step,  mile  by  mile,  south,  down  at  last  to  the  Land  of  Mordor.’ 

A  heavy  silence  fell  in  the  room.  Frodo  could  hear  his  heart 
beating.  Even  outside  everything  seemed  still.  No  sound  of 
Sam’s  shears  could  now  be  heard. 

‘Yes,  to  Mordor,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘Alas!  Mordor  draws  all 
wicked  things,  and  the  Dark  Power  was  bending  all  its  will  to 
gather  them  there.  The  Ring  of  the  Enemy  would  leave  its 
mark,  too,  leave  him  open  to  the  summons.  And  all  folk  were 
whispering  then  of  the  new  Shadow  in  the  South,  and  its 
hatred  of  the  West.  There  were  his  fine  new  friends,  who 
would  help  him  in  his  revenge! 

Wretched  fool!  In  that  land  he  would  learn  much,  too 
much  for  his  comfort.  And  sooner  or  later  as  he  lurked  and 
pried  on  the  borders  he  would  be  caught,  and  taken  -  for 
examination.  That  was  the  way  of  it,  I  fear.  When  he  was 
found  he  had  already  been  there  long,  and  was  on  his  way 
back.  On  some  errand  of  mischief.  But  that  does  not  matter 
much  now.  His  worst  mischief  was  done. 

‘Yes,  alas!  through  him  the  Enemy  has  learned  that  the 
One  has  been  found  again.  He  knows  where  Isildur  fell.  He 
knows  where  Gollum  found  his  ring.  He  knows  that  it  is  a 
Great  Ring,  for  it  gave  long  life.  He  knows  that  it  is  not  one 


78 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


of  the  Three,  for  they  have  never  been  lost,  and  they  endure 
no  evil.  He  knows  that  it  is  not  one  of  the  Seven,  or  the  Nine, 
for  they  are  accounted  for.  He  knows  that  it  is  the  One.  And 
he  has  at  last  heard,  I  think,  of  hobbits  and  the  Shire. 

‘The  Shire  -  he  may  be  seeking  for  it  now,  if  he  has  not 
already  found  out  where  it  lies.  Indeed,  Frodo,  I  fear  that  he 
may  even  think  that  the  long-unnoticed  name  of  Baggins  has 
become  important.’ 

‘But  this  is  terrible!’  cried  Frodo.  ‘Far  worse  than  the  worst 
that  I  imagined  from  your  hints  and  warnings.  O  Gandalf, 
best  of  friends,  what  am  I  to  do?  For  now  I  am  really  afraid. 
What  am  I  to  do?  What  a  pity  that  Bilbo  did  not  stab  that 
vile  creature,  when  he  had  a  chance!’ 

‘Pity?  It  was  Pity  that  stayed  his  hand.  Pity,  and  Mercy: 
not  to  strike  without  need.  And  he  has  been  well  rewarded, 
Frodo.  Be  sure  that  he  took  so  little  hurt  from  the  evil,  and 
escaped  in  the  end,  because  he  began  his  ownership  of  the 
Ring  so.  With  Pity.’ 

‘I  am  sorry,’  said  Frodo.  ‘But  I  am  frightened;  and  I  do  not 
feel  any  pity  for  Gollum.’ 

‘You  have  not  seen  him,’  Gandalf  broke  in. 

‘No,  and  I  don’t  want  to,’  said  Frodo.  ‘I  can’t  understand 
you.  Do  you  mean  to  say  that  you,  and  the  Elves,  have  let 
him  live  on  after  all  those  horrible  deeds?  Now  at  any  rate  he 
is  as  bad  as  an  Ore,  and  just  an  enemy.  He  deserves  death.’ 

‘Deserves  it!  I  daresay  he  does.  Many  that  live  deserve 
death.  And  some  that  die  deserve  life.  Can  you  give  it  to 
them?  Then  do  not  be  too  eager  to  deal  out  death  in  judge¬ 
ment.  For  even  the  very  wise  cannot  see  all  ends.  I  have  not 
much  hope  that  Gollum  can  be  cured  before  he  dies,  but 
there  is  a  chance  of  it.  And  he  is  bound  up  with  the  fate  of 
the  Ring.  My  heart  tells  me  that  he  has  some  part  to  play  yet, 
for  good  or  ill,  before  the  end;  and  when  that  comes,  the  pity 
of  Bilbo  may  rule  the  fate  of  many  -  yours  not  least.  In  any 
case  we  did  not  lull  him:  he  is  very  old  and  very  wretched. 
The  Wood-elves  have  him  in  prison,  but  they  treat  him  with 
such  kindness  as  they  can  find  in  their  wise  hearts.’ 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


79 


‘All  the  same,’  said  Frodo,  ‘even  if  Bilbo  could  not  kill 
Gollum,  I  wish  he  had  not  kept  the  Ring.  I  wish  he  had  never 
found  it,  and  that  I  had  not  got  it!  Why  did  you  let  me  keep 
it?  Why  didn’t  you  make  me  throw  it  away,  or,  or  destroy  it?’ 

‘Let  you?  Make  you?’  said  the  wizard.  ‘Haven’t  you  been 
listening  to  all  that  I  have  said?  You  are  not  thinking  of  what 
you  are  saying.  But  as  for  throwing  it  away,  that  was  obviously 
wrong.  These  Rings  have  a  way  of  being  found.  In  evil  hands 
it  might  have  done  great  evil.  Worst  of  all,  it  might  have  fallen 
into  the  hands  of  the  Enemy.  Indeed  it  certainly  would;  for 
this  is  the  One,  and  he  is  exerting  all  his  power  to  find  it  or 
draw  it  to  himself. 

‘Of  course,  my  dear  Frodo,  it  was  dangerous  for  you;  and 
that  has  troubled  me  deeply.  But  there  was  so  much  at  stake 
that  I  had  to  take  some  risk  -  though  even  when  I  was  far 
away  there  has  never  been  a  day  when  the  Shire  has  not  been 
guarded  by  watchful  eyes.  As  long  as  you  never  used  it,  I  did 
not  think  that  the  Ring  would  have  any  lasting  effect  on 
you,  not  for  evil,  not  at  any  rate  for  a  very  long  time.  And 
you  must  remember  that  nine  years  ago,  when  I  last  saw  you, 
I  still  knew  little  for  certain.’ 

‘But  why  not  destroy  it,  as  you  say  should  have  been  done 
long  ago?’  cried  Frodo  again.  ‘If  you  had  warned  me,  or  even 
sent  me  a  message,  I  would  have  done  away  with  it.’ 

‘Would  you?  How  would  you  do  that?  Have  you  ever  tried?’ 

‘No.  But  I  suppose  one  could  hammer  it  or  melt  it.’ 

‘Try!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘Try  now!’ 

Frodo  drew  the  Ring  out  of  his  pocket  again  and  looked  at 
it.  It  now  appeared  plain  and  smooth,  without  mark  or  device 
that  he  could  see.  The  gold  looked  very  fair  and  pure,  and 
Frodo  thought  how  rich  and  beautiful  was  its  colour,  how 
perfect  was  its  roundness.  It  was  an  admirable  thing  and 
altogether  precious.  When  he  took  it  out  he  had  intended  to 
fling  it  from  him  into  the  very  hottest  part  of  the  fire.  But  he 
found  now  that  he  could  not  do  so,  not  without  a  great 
struggle.  He  weighed  the  Ring  in  his  hand,  hesitating,  and 


8o 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


forcing  himself  to  remember  all  that  Gandalf  had  told  him; 
and  then  with  an  effort  of  will  he  made  a  movement,  as  if  to 
cast  it  away  -  but  he  found  that  he  had  put  it  back  in  his 
pocket. 

Gandalf  laughed  grimly.  ‘You  see?  Already  you  too,  Frodo, 
cannot  easily  let  it  go,  nor  will  to  damage  it.  And  I  could  not 
“make”  you  -  except  by  force,  which  would  break  your  mind. 
But  as  for  breaking  the  Ring,  force  is  useless.  Even  if  you 
took  it  and  struck  it  with  a  heavy  sledge-hammer,  it  would 
make  no  dint  in  it.  It  cannot  be  unmade  by  your  hands,  or 
by  mine. 

‘Your  small  fire,  of  course,  would  not  melt  even  ordinary 
gold.  This  Ring  has  already  passed  through  it  unscathed,  and 
even  unheated.  But  there  is  no  smith’s  forge  in  this  Shire  that 
could  change  it  at  all.  Not  even  the  anvils  and  furnaces  of  the 
Dwarves  could  do  that.  It  has  been  said  that  dragon-fire  could 
melt  and  consume  the  Rings  of  Power,  but  there  is  not  now 
any  dragon  left  on  earth  in  which  the  old  fire  is  hot  enough; 
nor  was  there  ever  any  dragon,  not  even  Ancalagon  the  Black, 
who  could  have  harmed  the  One  Ring,  the  Ruling  Ring,  for 
that  was  made  by  Sauron  himself. 

‘There  is  only  one  way:  to  find  the  Cracks  of  Doom  in  the 
depths  of  Orodruin,  the  Fire-mountain,  and  cast  the  Ring  in 
there,  if  you  really  wish  to  destroy  it,  to  put  it  beyond  the 
grasp  of  the  Enemy  for  ever.’ 

‘I  do  really  wish  to  destroy  it!’  cried  Frodo.  ‘Or,  well,  to 
have  it  destroyed.  I  am  not  made  for  perilous  quests.  I  wish 
I  had  never  seen  the  Ring!  Why  did  it  come  to  me?  Why 
was  I  chosen?’ 

‘Such  questions  cannot  be  answered,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘You 
may  be  sure  that  it  was  not  for  any  merit  that  others  do  not 
possess:  not  for  power  or  wisdom,  at  any  rate.  But  you  have 
been  chosen,  and  you  must  therefore  use  such  strength  and 
heart  and  wits  as  you  have.’ 

‘But  I  have  so  little  of  any  of  these  things!  You  are  wise 
and  powerful.  Will  you  not  take  the  Ring?’ 

‘No!’  cried  Gandalf,  springing  to  his  feet.  With  that  power 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


I  should  have  power  too  great  and  terrible.  And  over  me  the 
Ring  would  gain  a  power  still  greater  and  more  deadly.’  His 
eyes  flashed  and  his  face  was  lit  as  by  a  fire  within.  ‘Do  not 
tempt  me!  For  I  do  not  wish  to  become  like  the  Dark  Lord 
himself.  Yet  the  way  of  the  Ring  to  my  heart  is  by  pity,  pity 
for  weakness  and  the  desire  of  strength  to  do  good.  Do  not 
tempt  me!  I  dare  not  take  it,  not  even  to  keep  it  safe,  unused. 
The  wish  to  wield  it  would  be  too  great  for  my  strength.  I 
shall  have  such  need  of  it.  Great  perils  lie  before  me.’ 

He  went  to  the  window  and  drew  aside  the  curtains  and 
the  shutters.  Sunlight  streamed  back  again  into  the  room. 
Sam  passed  along  the  path  outside  whistling.  ‘And  now,’  said 
the  wizard,  turning  back  to  Frodo,  ‘the  decision  lies  with  you. 
But  I  will  always  help  you.’  He  laid  his  hand  on  Frodo’s 
shoulder.  ‘I  will  help  you  bear  this  burden,  as  long  as  it  is 
yours  to  bear.  But  we  must  do  something,  soon.  The  Enemy 
is  moving.’ 

There  was  a  long  silence.  Gandalf  sat  down  again  and 
puffed  at  his  pipe,  as  if  lost  in  thought.  His  eyes  seemed 
closed,  but  under  the  lids  he  was  watching  Frodo  intently. 
Frodo  gazed  fixedly  at  the  red  embers  on  the  hearth,  until 
they  filled  all  his  vision,  and  he  seemed  to  be  looking  down 
into  profound  wells  of  fire.  He  was  thinking  of  the  fabled 
Cracks  of  Doom  and  the  terror  of  the  Fiery  Mountain. 

‘Well!’  said  Gandalf  at  last.  ‘What  are  you  thinking  about? 
Have  you  decided  what  to  do?’ 

‘No!’  answered  Frodo,  coming  back  to  himself  out  of  dark¬ 
ness,  and  finding  to  his  surprise  that  it  was  not  dark,  and  that 
out  of  the  window  he  could  see  the  sunlit  garden.  ‘Or  perhaps, 
yes.  As  far  as  I  understand  what  you  have  said,  I  suppose  I 
must  keep  the  Ring  and  guard  it,  at  least  for  the  present, 
whatever  it  may  do  to  me.’ 

‘Whatever  it  may  do,  it  will  be  slow,  slow  to  evil,  if  you 
keep  it  with  that  purpose,’  said  Gandalf. 

‘I  hope  so,’  said  Frodo.  ‘But  I  hope  that  you  may  find  some 
other  better  keeper  soon.  But  in  the  meanwhile  it  seems  that 


82 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


I  am  a  danger,  a  danger  to  all  that  live  near  me.  I  cannot  keep 
the  Ring  and  stay  here.  I  ought  to  leave  Bag  End,  leave  the 
Shire,  leave  everything  and  go  away.’  He  sighed. 

‘I  should  like  to  save  the  Shire,  if  I  could  -  though  there 
have  been  times  when  I  thought  the  inhabitants  too  stupid 
and  dull  for  words,  and  have  felt  that  an  earthquake  or  an 
invasion  of  dragons  might  be  good  for  them.  But  I  don’t  feel 
like  that  now.  I  feel  that  as  long  as  the  Shire  lies  behind,  safe 
and  comfortable,  I  shall  find  wandering  more  bearable:  I  shall 
know  that  somewhere  there  is  a  firm  foothold,  even  if  my  feet 
cannot  stand  there  again. 

‘Of  course,  I  have  sometimes  thought  of  going  away,  but 
I  imagined  that  as  a  kind  of  holiday,  a  series  of  adventures 
like  Bilbo’s  or  better,  ending  in  peace.  But  this  would  mean 
exile,  a  flight  from  danger  into  danger,  drawing  it  after  me. 
And  I  suppose  I  must  go  alone,  if  I  am  to  do  that  and  save 
the  Shire.  But  I  feel  very  small,  and  very  uprooted,  and  well 
-  desperate.  The  Enemy  is  so  strong  and  terrible.’ 

He  did  not  tell  Gandalf,  but  as  he  was  speaking  a  great 
desire  to  follow  Bilbo  flamed  up  in  his  heart  -  to  follow  Bilbo, 
and  even  perhaps  to  find  him  again.  It  was  so  strong  that  it 
overcame  his  fear:  he  could  almost  have  run  out  there  and 
then  down  the  road  without  his  hat,  as  Bilbo  had  done  on  a 
similar  morning  long  ago. 

‘My  dear  Frodo!’  exclaimed  Gandalf.  ‘Hobbits  really  are 
amazing  creatures,  as  I  have  said  before.  You  can  learn  all 
that  there  is  to  know  about  their  ways  in  a  month,  and  yet 
after  a  hundred  years  they  can  still  surprise  you  at  a  pinch.  I 
hardly  expected  to  get  such  an  answer,  not  even  from  you. 
But  Bilbo  made  no  mistake  in  choosing  his  heir,  though  he 
little  thought  how  important  it  would  prove.  I  am  afraid  you 
are  right.  The  Ring  will  not  be  able  to  stay  hidden  in  the 
Shire  much  longer;  and  for  your  own  sake,  as  well  as  for 
others,  you  will  have  to  go,  and  leave  the  name  of  Baggins 
behind  you.  That  name  will  not  be  safe  to  have,  outside  the 
Shire  or  in  the  Wild.  I  will  give  you  a  travelling  name  now. 
When  you  go,  go  as  Mr.  Underhill. 


THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  PAST 


83 


‘But  I  don’t  think  you  need  go  alone.  Not  if  you  know  of 
anyone  you  can  trust,  and  who  would  be  willing  to  go  by 
your  side  -  and  that  you  would  be  willing  to  take  into 
unknown  perils.  But  if  you  look  for  a  companion,  be  careful 
in  choosing!  And  be  careful  of  what  you  say,  even  to  your 
closest  friends!  The  enemy  has  many  spies  and  many  ways 
of  hearing.’ 

Suddenly  he  stopped  as  if  listening.  Frodo  became  aware 
that  all  was  very  quiet,  inside  and  outside.  Gandalf  crept  to 
one  side  of  the  window.  Then  with  a  dart  he  sprang  to  the 
sill,  and  thrust  a  long  arm  out  and  downwards.  There  was  a 
squawk,  and  up  came  Sam  Gamgee’s  curly  head  hauled  by 
one  ear. 

‘Well,  well,  bless  my  beard!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘Sam  Gamgee 
is  it?  Now  what  may  you  be  doing?’ 

‘Lor  bless  you,  Mr.  Gandalf,  sir!’  said  Sam.  ‘Nothing! 
Leastways  I  was  just  trimming  the  grass-border  under  the 
window,  if  you  follow  me.’  He  picked  up  his  shears  and 
exhibited  them  as  evidence. 

‘I  don’t,’  said  Gandalf  grimly.  ‘It  is  some  time  since  I  last 
heard  the  sound  of  your  shears.  How  long  have  you  been 
eavesdropping?’ 

‘Eavesdropping,  sir?  I  don’t  follow  you,  begging  your 
pardon.  There  ain’t  no  eaves  at  Bag  End,  and  that’s  a  fact.’ 

‘Don’t  be  a  fool!  What  have  you  heard,  and  why  did  you 
listen?’  Gandalf ’s  eyes  flashed  and  his  brows  stuck  out  like 
bristles. 

‘Mr.  Frodo,  sir!’  cried  Sam  quaking.  ‘Don’t  let  him  hurt 
me,  sir!  Don’t  let  him  turn  me  into  anything  unnatural!  My 
old  dad  would  take  on  so.  I  meant  no  harm,  on  my  honour, 
sir!’ 

‘He  won’t  hurt  you,’  said  Frodo,  hardly  able  to  keep  from 
laughing,  although  he  was  himself  startled  and  rather  puzzled. 
‘He  knows,  as  well  as  I  do,  that  you  mean  no  harm.  But  just 
you  up  and  answer  his  questions  straight  away!’ 

Well,  sir,’  said  Sam  dithering  a  little.  ‘I  heard  a  deal  that 
I  didn’t  rightly  understand,  about  an  enemy,  and  rings,  and 


84 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Mr.  Bilbo,  sir,  and  dragons,  and  a  fiery  mountain,  and  -  and 
Elves,  sir.  I  listened  because  I  couldn’t  help  myself,  if  you 
know  what  I  mean.  Lor  bless  me,  sir,  but  I  do  love  tales  of 
that  sort.  And  I  believe  them  too,  whatever  Ted  may  say. 
Elves,  sir!  I  would  dearly  love  to  see  them.  Couldn’t  you  take 
me  to  see  Elves,  sir,  when  you  go?’ 

Suddenly  Gandalf  laughed.  ‘Come  inside!’  he  shouted,  and 
putting  out  both  his  arms  he  lifted  the  astonished  Sam,  shears, 
grass-clippings  and  all,  right  through  the  window  and  stood 
him  on  the  floor.  ‘Take  you  to  see  Elves,  eh?’  he  said,  eyeing 
Sam  closely,  but  with  a  smile  flickering  on  his  face.  ‘So  you 
heard  that  Mr.  Frodo  is  going  away?’ 

‘I  did,  sir.  And  that’s  why  I  choked:  which  you  heard 
seemingly.  I  tried  not  to,  sir,  but  it  burst  out  of  me:  I  was  so 
upset.’ 

‘It  can’t  be  helped,  Sam,’  said  Frodo  sadly.  He  had  sud¬ 
denly  realized  that  flying  from  the  Shire  would  mean  more 
painful  partings  than  merely  saying  farewell  to  the  familiar 
comforts  of  Bag  End.  ‘I  shall  have  to  go.  But’  -  and  here  he 
looked  hard  at  Sam  -  ‘if  you  really  care  about  me,  you  will 
keep  that  dead  secret.  See?  If  you  don’t,  if  you  even  breathe 
a  word  of  what  you’ve  heard  here,  then  I  hope  Gandalf  will 
turn  you  into  a  spotted  toad  and  fill  the  garden  full  of  grass- 
snakes.’ 

Sam  fell  on  his  knees,  trembling.  ‘Get  up,  Sam!’  said 
Gandalf.  ‘I  have  thought  of  something  better  than  that.  Some¬ 
thing  to  shut  your  mouth,  and  punish  you  properly  for  listen¬ 
ing.  You  shall  go  away  with  Mr.  Frodo!’ 

‘Me,  sir!’  cried  Sam,  springing  up  like  a  dog  invited  for  a 
walk.  ‘Me  go  and  see  Elves  and  all!  Hooray!’  he  shouted,  and 
then  burst  into  tears. 


Chapter  3 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


‘You  ought  to  go  quietly,  and  you  ought  to  go  soon,’  said 
Gandalf.  Two  or  three  weeks  had  passed,  and  still  Frodo 
made  no  sign  of  getting  ready  to  go. 

‘I  know.  But  it  is  difficult  to  do  both,’  he  objected.  ‘If  I  just 
vanish  like  Bilbo,  the  tale  will  be  all  over  the  Shire  in  no  time.’ 

‘Of  course  you  mustn’t  vanish!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘That 
wouldn’t  do  at  all!  I  said  soon,  not  instantly.  If  you  can  think 
of  any  way  of  slipping  out  of  the  Shire  without  its  being 
generally  known,  it  will  be  worth  a  little  delay.  But  you  must 
not  delay  too  long.’ 

‘What  about  the  autumn,  on  or  after  Our  Birthday?’  asked 
Frodo.  ‘I  think  I  could  probably  make  some  arrangements  by 
then.’ 

To  tell  the  truth,  he  was  very  reluctant  to  start,  now  that  it 
had  come  to  the  point:  Bag  End  seemed  a  more  desirable 
residence  than  it  had  for  years,  and  he  wanted  to  savour  as 
much  as  he  could  of  his  last  summer  in  the  Shire.  When 
autumn  came,  he  knew  that  part  at  least  of  his  heart  would 
think  more  kindly  of  journeying,  as  it  always  did  at  that 
season.  He  had  indeed  privately  made  up  his  mind  to  leave 
on  his  fiftieth  birthday:  Bilbo’s  one  hundred  and  twenty- 
eighth.  It  seemed  somehow  the  proper  day  on  which  to  set 
out  and  follow  him.  Following  Bilbo  was  uppermost  in  his 
mind,  and  the  one  thing  that  made  the  thought  of  leaving 
bearable.  He  thought  as  little  as  possible  about  the  Ring,  and 
where  it  might  lead  him  in  the  end.  But  he  did  not  tell  all  his 
thoughts  to  Gandalf.  What  the  wizard  guessed  was  always 
difficult  to  tell. 

He  looked  at  Frodo  and  smiled.  ‘Very  well,’  he  said.  ‘I  think 
that  will  do  -  but  it  must  not  be  any  later.  I  am  getting  very 


86 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


anxious.  In  the  meanwhile,  do  take  care,  and  don’t  let  out 
any  hint  of  where  you  are  going!  And  see  that  Sam  Gamgee 
does  not  talk.  If  he  does,  I  really  shall  turn  him  into  a  toad.’ 

‘As  for  where  I  am  going,’  said  Frodo,  ‘it  would  be  difficult 
to  give  that  away,  for  I  have  no  clear  idea  myself,  yet.’ 

‘Don’t  be  absurd!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘I  am  not  warning  you 
against  leaving  an  address  at  the  post-office!  But  you  are 
leaving  the  Shire  -  and  that  should  not  be  known,  until  you 
are  far  away.  And  you  must  go,  or  at  least  set  out,  either 
North,  South,  West  or  East  -  and  the  direction  should  cer¬ 
tainly  not  be  known.’ 

‘I  have  been  so  taken  up  with  the  thoughts  of  leaving  Bag 
End,  and  of  saying  farewell,  that  I  have  never  even  considered 
the  direction,’  said  Frodo.  ‘For  where  am  I  to  go?  And  by 
what  shall  I  steer?  What  is  to  be  my  quest?  Bilbo  went  to  find 
a  treasure,  there  and  back  again;  but  I  go  to  lose  one,  and  not 
return,  as  far  as  I  can  see.’ 

‘But  you  cannot  see  very  far,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘Neither  can 
I.  It  may  be  your  task  to  find  the  Cracks  of  Doom;  but  that 
quest  may  be  for  others:  I  do  not  know.  At  any  rate  you  are 
not  ready  for  that  long  road  yet.’ 

‘No  indeed!’  said  Frodo.  ‘But  in  the  meantime  what  course 
am  I  to  take?’ 

‘Towards  danger;  but  not  too  rashly,  nor  too  straight,’ 
answered  the  wizard.  ‘If  you  want  my  advice,  make  for 
Rivendell.  That  journey  should  not  prove  too  perilous, 
though  the  Road  is  less  easy  than  it  was,  and  it  will  grow 
worse  as  the  year  fails.’ 

‘Rivendell!’  said  Frodo.  ‘Very  good:  I  will  go  east,  and  I 
will  make  for  Rivendell.  I  will  take  Sam  to  visit  the  Elves;  he 
will  be  delighted.’  He  spoke  lightly;  but  his  heart  was  moved 
suddenly  with  a  desire  to  see  the  house  of  Elrond  Halfelven, 
and  breathe  the  air  of  that  deep  valley  where  many  of  the 
Fair  Folk  still  dwelt  in  peace. 

One  summer’s  evening  an  astonishing  piece  of  news 
reached  the  Ivy  Bush  and  Green  Dragon.  Giants  and  other 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


87 


portents  on  the  borders  of  the  Shire  were  forgotten  for  more 
important  matters:  Mr.  Frodo  was  selling  Bag  End,  indeed 
he  had  already  sold  it  -  to  the  Sackville-Bagginses! 

‘For  a  nice  bit,  too,’  said  some.  ‘At  a  bargain  price,’  said 
others,  ‘and  that’s  more  likely  when  Mistress  Lobelia’s  the 
buyer.’  (Otho  had  died  some  years  before,  at  the  ripe  but 
disappointed  age  of  102.) 

Just  why  Mr.  Frodo  was  selling  his  beautiful  hole  was  even 
more  debatable  than  the  price.  A  few  held  the  theory  -  sup¬ 
ported  by  the  nods  and  hints  of  Air.  Baggins  himself  -  that 
Frodo’s  money  was  running  out:  he  was  going  to  leave 
Hobbiton  and  live  in  a  quiet  way  on  the  proceeds  of  the  sale 
down  in  Buckland  among  his  Brandybuck  relations.  ‘As  far 
from  the  Sackville-Bagginses  as  may  be,’  some  added.  But  so 
firmly  fixed  had  the  notion  of  the  immeasurable  wealth  of  the 
Bagginses  of  Bag  End  become  that  most  found  this  hard  to 
believe,  harder  than  any  other  reason  or  unreason  that  their 
fancy  could  suggest:  to  most  it  suggested  a  dark  and  yet 
unrevealed  plot  by  Gandalf.  Though  he  kept  himself  very 
quiet  and  did  not  go  about  by  day,  it  was  well  known  that  he 
was  ‘hiding  up  in  the  Bag  End’.  But  however  a  removal  might 
fit  in  with  the  designs  of  his  wizardry,  there  was  no  doubt 
about  the  fact:  Frodo  Baggins  was  going  back  to  Buckland. 

‘Yes,  I  shall  be  moving  this  autumn,’  he  said.  ‘Merry 
Brandybuck  is  looking  out  for  a  nice  little  hole  for  me,  or 
perhaps  a  small  house.’ 

As  a  matter  of  fact  with  Merry’s  help  he  had  already  chosen 
and  bought  a  little  house  at  Crickhollow  in  the  country 
beyond  Bucklebury.  To  all  but  Sam  he  pretended  he  was 
going  to  settle  down  there  permanently.  The  decision  to  set 
out  eastwards  had  suggested  the  idea  to  him;  for  Buckland 
was  on  the  eastern  borders  of  the  Shire,  and  as  he  had  lived 
there  in  childhood  his  going  back  would  at  least  seem 
credible. 

Gandalf  stayed  in  the  Shire  for  over  two  months.  Then  one 
evening,  at  the  end  of  June,  soon  after  Frodo’s  plan  had  been 


88 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


finally  arranged,  he  suddenly  announced  that  he  was  going 
off  again  next  morning.  ‘Only  for  a  short  while,  I  hope,’  he 
said.  ‘But  I  am  going  down  beyond  the  southern  borders  to 
get  some  news,  if  I  can.  I  have  been  idle  longer  than  I  should.’ 

He  spoke  lightly,  but  it  seemed  to  Frodo  that  he  looked 
rather  worried.  ‘Has  anything  happened?’  he  asked. 

‘Well  no;  but  I  have  heard  something  that  has  made  me 
anxious  and  needs  looking  into.  If  I  think  it  necessary  after 
all  for  you  to  get  off  at  once,  I  shall  come  back  immediately, 
or  at  least  send  word.  In  the  meanwhile  stick  to  your  plan; 
but  be  more  careful  than  ever,  especially  of  the  Ring.  Let  me 
impress  on  you  once  more:  don’t  use  it!’ 

He  went  off  at  dawn.  ‘I  may  be  back  any  day,’  he  said.  ‘At 
the  very  latest  I  shall  come  back  for  the  farewell  party.  I  think 
after  all  you  may  need  my  company  on  the  Road.’ 

At  first  Frodo  was  a  good  deal  disturbed,  and  wondered 
often  what  Gandalf  could  have  heard;  but  his  uneasiness 
wore  off,  and  in  the  fine  weather  he  forgot  his  troubles  for  a 
while.  The  Shire  had  seldom  seen  so  fair  a  summer,  or  so 
rich  an  autumn:  the  trees  were  laden  with  apples,  honey  was 
dripping  in  the  combs,  and  the  corn  was  tall  and  full. 

Autumn  was  well  under  way  before  Frodo  began  to  worry 
about  Gandalf  again.  September  was  passing  and  there  was 
still  no  news  of  him.  The  Birthday,  and  the  removal,  drew 
nearer,  and  still  he  did  not  come,  or  send  word.  Bag  End 
began  to  be  busy.  Some  of  Frodo’s  friends  came  to  stay  and 
help  him  with  the  packing:  there  was  Fredegar  Bolger  and 
Folco  Boffin,  and  of  course  his  special  friends  Pippin  Took 
and  Merry  Brandybuck.  Between  them  they  turned  the  whole 
place  upside-down. 

On  September  20th  two  covered  carts  went  off  laden  to 
Buckland,  conveying  the  furniture  and  goods  that  Frodo  had 
not  sold  to  his  new  home,  by  way  of  the  Brandywine 
Bridge. The  next  day  Frodo  became  really  anxious,  and  kept 
a  constant  look-out  for  Gandalf.  Thursday,  his  birthday 
morning,  dawned  as  fair  and  clear  as  it  had  long  ago  for 
Bilbo’s  great  party.  Still  Gandalf  did  not  appear.  In  the 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


89 


evening  Frodo  gave  his  farewell  feast:  it  was  quite  small,  just 
a  dinner  for  himself  and  his  four  helpers;  but  he  was  troubled 
and  felt  in  no  mood  for  it.  The  thought  that  he  would  so 
soon  have  to  part  with  his  young  friends  weighed  on  his  heart. 
He  wondered  how  he  would  break  it  to  them. 

The  four  younger  hobbits  were,  however,  in  high  spirits, 
and  the  party  soon  became  very  cheerful  in  spite  of  Gandalf ’s 
absence.  The  dining-room  was  bare  except  for  a  table  and 
chairs,  but  the  food  was  good,  and  there  was  good  wine: 
Frodo’s  wine  had  not  been  included  in  the  sale  to  the 
Sackville-Bagginses. 

‘Whatever  happens  to  the  rest  of  my  stuff,  when  the  S.-B.s 
get  their  claws  on  it,  at  any  rate  I  have  found  a  good  home 
for  this!’  said  Frodo,  as  he  drained  his  glass.  It  was  the  last 
drop  of  Old  Winyards. 

When  they  had  sung  many  songs,  and  talked  of  many 
things  they  had  done  together,  they  toasted  Bilbo’s  birthday, 
and  they  drank  his  health  and  Frodo’s  together  according  to 
Frodo’s  custom.  Then  they  went  out  for  a  sniff  of  air,  and 
glimpse  of  the  stars,  and  then  they  went  to  bed.  Frodo’s  party 
was  over,  and  Gandalf  had  not  come. 

The  next  morning  they  were  busy  packing  another  cart 
with  the  remainder  of  the  luggage.  Merry  took  charge  of  this, 
and  drove  off  with  Fatty  (that  is  Fredegar  Bolger).  ‘Someone 
must  get  there  and  warm  the  house  before  you  arrive,’  said 
Merry.  ‘Well,  see  you  later  -  the  day  after  tomorrow,  if  you 
don’t  go  to  sleep  on  the  way!’ 

Folco  went  home  after  lunch,  but  Pippin  remained  behind. 
Frodo  was  restless  and  anxious,  listening  in  vain  for  a  sound 
of  Gandalf.  He  decided  to  wait  until  nightfall.  After  that,  if 
Gandalf  wanted  him  urgently,  he  would  go  to  Crickhollow, 
and  might  even  get  there  first.  For  Frodo  was  going  on  foot. 
His  plan  -  for  pleasure  and  a  last  look  at  the  Shire  as  much  as 
any  other  reason  -  was  to  walk  from  Hobbiton  to  Bucklebury 
Ferry,  taking  it  fairly  easy. 

‘I  shall  get  myself  a  bit  into  training,  too,’  he  said,  looking 


90 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


at  himself  in  a  dusty  mirror  in  the  half-empty  hall.  He  had 
not  done  any  strenuous  walking  for  a  long  time,  and  the 
reflection  looked  rather  flabby,  he  thought. 

After  lunch,  the  Sackville-Bagginses,  Lobelia  and  her 
sandy-haired  son,  Lotho,  turned  up,  much  to  Frodo’s  annoy¬ 
ance.  ‘Ours  at  last!’  said  Lobelia,  as  she  stepped  inside.  It  was 
not  polite;  nor  strictly  true,  for  the  sale  of  Bag  End  did  not 
take  effect  until  midnight.  But  Lobelia  can  perhaps  be  for¬ 
given:  she  had  been  obliged  to  wait  about  seventy-seven  years 
longer  for  Bag  End  than  she  once  hoped,  and  she  was  now  a 
hundred  years  old.  Anyway,  she  had  come  to  see  that  nothing 
she  had  paid  for  had  been  carried  off;  and  she  wanted  the 
keys.  It  took  a  long  while  to  satisfy  her,  as  she  had  brought  a 
complete  inventory  with  her  and  went  right  through  it.  In  the 
end  she  departed  with  Lotho  and  the  spare  key  and  the 
promise  that  the  other  key  would  be  left  at  the  Gamgees’  in 
Bagshot  Row.  She  snorted,  and  showed  plainly  that  she 
thought  the  Gamgees  capable  of  plundering  the  hole  during 
the  night.  Frodo  did  not  offer  her  any  tea. 

He  took  his  own  tea  with  Pippin  and  Sam  Gamgee  in  the 
kitchen.  It  had  been  officially  announced  that  Sam  was 
coming  to  Buckland  ‘to  do  for  Mr.  Frodo  and  look  after  his 
bit  of  garden’;  an  arrangement  that  was  approved  by  the 
Gaffer,  though  it  did  not  console  him  for  the  prospect  of 
having  Lobelia  as  a  neighbour. 

‘Our  last  meal  at  Bag  End!’  said  Frodo,  pushing  back  his 
chair.  They  left  the  washing  up  for  Lobelia.  Pippin  and  Sam 
strapped  up  their  three  packs  and  piled  them  in  the  porch. 
Pippin  went  out  for  a  last  stroll  in  the  garden.  Sam  dis¬ 
appeared. 

The  sun  went  down.  Bag  End  seemed  sad  and  gloomy  and 
dishevelled.  Frodo  wandered  round  the  familiar  rooms,  and 
saw  the  light  of  the  sunset  fade  on  the  walls,  and  shadows 
creep  out  of  the  corners.  It  grew  slowly  dark  indoors.  He 
went  out  and  walked  down  to  the  gate  at  the  bottom  of  the 
path,  and  then  on  a  short  way  down  the  Hill  Road.  He  half 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


91 


expected  to  see  Gandalf  come  striding  up  through  the  dusk. 

The  sky  was  clear  and  the  stars  were  growing  bright.  ‘It’s 
going  to  be  a  fine  night,’  he  said  aloud.  ‘That’s  good  for  a 
beginning.  I  feel  like  walking.  I  can’t  bear  any  more  hanging 
about.  I  am  going  to  start,  and  Gandalf  must  follow  me.’  He 
turned  to  go  back,  and  then  stopped,  for  he  heard  voices,  just 
round  the  corner  by  the  end  of  Bagshot  Row.  One  voice  was 
certainly  the  old  Gaffer’s;  the  other  was  strange,  and  some¬ 
how  unpleasant.  He  could  not  make  out  what  it  said,  but  he 
heard  the  Gaffer’s  answers,  which  were  rather  shrill.  The  old 
man  seemed  put  out. 

‘No,  Mr.  Baggins  has  gone  away.  Went  this  morning,  and 
my  Sam  went  with  him:  anyway  all  his  stuff  went.  Yes,  sold 
out  and  gone,  I  tell’ee.  Why?  Why’s  none  of  my  business, 
or  yours.  Where  to?  That  ain’t  no  secret.  He’s  moved  to 
Bucklebury  or  some  such  place,  away  down  yonder.  Yes  it  is 
-  a  tidy  way.  I’ve  never  been  so  far  myself;  they’re  queer  folks 
in  Buckland.  No,  I  can’t  give  no  message.  Good  night  to 
you!’ 

Footsteps  went  away  down  the  Hill.  Frodo  wondered 
vaguely  why  the  fact  that  they  did  not  come  on  up  the  Hill 
seemed  a  great  relief.  ‘I  am  sick  of  questions  and  curiosity 
about  my  doings,  I  suppose,’  he  thought.  What  an  inquisitive 
lot  they  all  are!’  He  had  half  a  mind  to  go  and  ask  the  Gaffer 
who  the  inquirer  was;  but  he  thought  better  (or  worse)  of  it, 
and  turned  and  walked  quickly  back  to  Bag  End. 

Pippin  was  sitting  on  his  pack  in  the  porch.  Sam  was  not 
there.  Frodo  stepped  inside  the  dark  door.  ‘Sam!’  he  called. 
‘Sam!  Time!’ 

‘Coming,  sir!’  came  the  answer  from  far  within,  followed 
soon  by  Sam  himself,  wiping  his  mouth.  He  had  been  saying 
farewell  to  the  beer-barrel  in  the  cellar. 

‘All  aboard,  Sam?’  said  Frodo. 

‘Yes,  sir.  I’ll  last  for  a  bit  now,  sir.’ 

Frodo  shut  and  locked  the  round  door,  and  gave  the  key 
to  Sam.  ‘Run  down  with  this  to  your  home,  Sam!’  he  said. 
‘Then  cut  along  the  Row  and  meet  us  as  quick  as  you  can  at 


92 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


the  gate  in  the  lane  beyond  the  meadows.  We  are  not  going 
through  the  village  tonight.  Too  many  ears  pricking  and  eyes 
prying.’  Sam  ran  off  at  full  speed. 

Well,  now  we’re  off  at  last!’  said  Frodo.  They  shouldered 
their  packs  and  took  up  their  sticks,  and  walked  round  the 
corner  to  the  west  side  of  Bag  End.  ‘Good-bye!’  said  Frodo, 
looking  at  the  dark  blank  windows.  He  waved  his  hand,  and 
then  turned  and  (following  Bilbo,  if  he  had  known  it)  hurried 
after  Peregrin  down  the  garden-path.  They  jumped  over  the 
low  place  in  the  hedge  at  the  bottom  and  took  to  the  fields, 
passing  into  the  darkness  like  a  rustle  in  the  grasses. 

At  the  bottom  of  the  Hill  on  its  western  side  they  came  to 
the  gate  opening  on  to  a  narrow  lane.  There  they  halted  and 
adjusted  the  straps  of  their  packs.  Presently  Sam  appeared, 
trotting  quickly  and  breathing  hard;  his  heavy  pack  was 
hoisted  high  on  his  shoulders,  and  he  had  put  on  his  head  a 
tall  shapeless  felt  bag,  which  he  called  a  hat.  In  the  gloom  he 
looked  very  much  like  a  dwarf. 

‘I  am  sure  you  have  given  me  all  the  heaviest  stuff,’  said 
Frodo.  ‘I  pity  snails,  and  all  that  carry  their  homes  on  their 
backs.’ 

‘I  could  take  a  lot  more  yet,  sir.  My  packet  is  quite  light,’ 
said  Sam  stoutly  and  untruthfully. 

‘No  you  don’t,  Sam!’  said  Pippin.  ‘It  is  good  for  him.  He’s 
got  nothing  except  what  he  ordered  us  to  pack.  He’s  been 
slack  lately,  and  he’ll  feel  the  weight  less  when  he’s  walked 
off  some  of  his  own.’ 

‘Be  land  to  a  poor  old  hobbit!’  laughed  Frodo.  ‘I  shall  be 
as  thin  as  a  willow-wand,  I’m  sure,  before  I  get  to  Buckland. 
But  I  was  talking  nonsense.  I  suspect  you  have  taken  more 
than  your  share,  Sam,  and  I  shall  look  into  it  at  our  next 
packing.’  He  picked  up  his  stick  again.  ‘Well,  we  all  like 
walking  in  the  dark,’  he  said,  ‘so  let’s  put  some  miles  behind 
us  before  bed.’ 

For  a  short  way  they  followed  the  lane  westwards.  Then 
leaving  it  they  turned  left  and  took  quietly  to  the  fields  again. 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


93 


They  went  in  single  file  along  hedgerows  and  the  borders  of 
coppices,  and  night  fell  dark  about  them.  In  their  dark  cloaks 
they  were  as  invisible  as  if  they  all  had  magic  rings.  Since 
they  were  all  hobbits,  and  were  trying  to  be  silent,  they  made 
no  noise  that  even  hobbits  would  hear.  Even  the  wild  things 
in  the  fields  and  woods  hardly  noticed  their  passing. 

After  some  time  they  crossed  the  Water,  west  of  Hobbiton, 
by  a  narrow  plank-bridge.  The  stream  was  there  no  more  than 
a  winding  black  ribbon,  bordered  with  leaning  alder-trees.  A 
mile  or  two  further  south  they  hastily  crossed  the  great  road 
from  the  Brandywine  Bridge;  they  were  now  in  the  Tookland 
and  bending  south-eastwards  they  made  for  the  Green  Hill 
Country.  As  they  began  to  climb  its  first  slopes  they  looked 
back  and  saw  the  lamps  in  Hobbiton  far  off  twinkling  in  the 
gentle  valley  of  the  Water.  Soon  it  disappeared  in  the  folds 
of  the  darkened  land,  and  was  followed  by  Bywater  beside  its 
grey  pool.  When  the  light  of  the  last  farm  was  far  behind, 
peeping  among  the  trees,  Frodo  turned  and  waved  a  hand  in 
farewell. 

‘I  wonder  if  I  shall  ever  look  down  into  that  valley  again,’ 
he  said  quietly. 

When  they  had  walked  for  about  three  hours  they  rested. 
The  night  was  clear,  cool,  and  starry,  but  smoke-like  wisps 
of  mist  were  creeping  up  the  hill-sides  from  the  streams  and 
deep  meadows.  Thin-clad  birches,  swaying  in  a  light  wind 
above  their  heads,  made  a  black  net  against  the  pale  sky. 
They  ate  a  very  frugal  supper  (for  hobbits),  and  then  went 
on  again.  Soon  they  struck  a  narrow  road,  that  went  rolling 
up  and  down,  fading  grey  into  the  darkness  ahead:  the  road 
to  Woodhall,  and  Stock,  and  the  Bucklebury  Ferry.  It  climbed 
away  from  the  main  road  in  the  Water-valley,  and  wound 
over  the  skirts  of  the  Green  Hills  towards  Woody  End,  a  wild 
corner  of  the  Eastfarthing. 

After  a  while  they  plunged  into  a  deeply  cloven  track 
between  tall  trees  that  rustled  their  dry  leaves  in  the  night.  It 
was  very  dark.  At  first  they  talked,  or  hummed  a  tune  softly 
together,  being  now  far  away  from  inquisitive  ears.  Then  they 


94 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


marched  on  in  silence,  and  Pippin  began  to  lag  behind.  At 
last,  as  they  began  to  climb  a  steep  slope,  he  stopped  and 
yawned. 

‘I  am  so  sleepy,’  he  said,  ‘that  soon  I  shall  fall  down  on 
the  road.  Are  you  going  to  sleep  on  your  legs?  It  is  nearly 
midnight.’ 

‘I  thought  you  liked  walking  in  the  dark,’  said  Frodo.  ‘But 
there  is  no  great  hurry.  Merry  expects  us  some  time  the  day 
after  tomorrow;  but  that  leaves  us  nearly  two  days  more. 
We’ll  halt  at  the  first  likely  spot.’ 

‘The  wind’s  in  the  West,’  said  Sam.  ‘If  we  get  to  the  other 
side  of  this  hill,  we  shall  find  a  spot  that  is  sheltered  and  snug 
enough,  sir.  There  is  a  dry  fir-wood  just  ahead,  if  I  remember 
rightly.’  Sam  knew  the  land  well  within  twenty  miles  of 
Hobbiton,  but  that  was  the  limit  of  his  geography. 

Just  over  the  top  of  the  hill  they  came  on  the  patch  of 
fir-wood.  Leaving  the  road  they  went  into  the  deep  resin- 
scented  darkness  of  the  trees,  and  gathered  dead  sticks  and 
cones  to  make  a  fire.  Soon  they  had  a  merry  crackle  of  flame 
at  the  foot  of  a  large  fir-tree  and  they  sat  round  it  for  a  while, 
until  they  began  to  nod.  Then,  each  in  an  angle  of  the  great 
tree’s  roots,  they  curled  up  in  their  cloaks  and  blankets,  and 
were  soon  fast  asleep.  They  set  no  watch;  even  Frodo  feared 
no  danger  yet,  for  they  were  still  in  the  heart  of  the  Shire.  A 
few  creatures  came  and  looked  at  them  when  the  fire  had 
died  away.  A  fox  passing  through  the  wood  on  business  of 
his  own  stopped  several  minutes  and  sniffed. 

‘Hobbits!’  he  thought.  ‘Well,  what  next?  I  have  heard  of 
strange  doings  in  this  land,  but  I  have  seldom  heard  of  a 
hobbit  sleeping  out  of  doors  under  a  tree.  Three  of  them! 
There’s  something  mighty  queer  behind  this.’  He  was  quite 
right,  but  he  never  found  out  any  more  about  it. 

The  morning  came,  pale  and  clammy.  Frodo  woke  up  first, 
and  found  that  a  tree-root  had  made  a  hole  in  his  back,  and 
that  his  neck  was  stiff.  ‘Walking  for  pleasure!  Why  didn’t  I 
drive?’  he  thought,  as  he  usually  did  at  the  beginning  of  an 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


95 


expedition.  ‘And  all  my  beautiful  feather  beds  are  sold  to  the 
Sackville-Bagginses!  These  tree-roots  would  do  them  good.’ 
He  stretched.  ‘Wake  up,  hobbits!’  he  cried.  ‘It’s  a  beautiful 
morning.’ 

‘What’s  beautiful  about  it?’  said  Pippin,  peering  over  the 
edge  of  his  blanket  with  one  eye.  ‘Sam!  Get  breakfast  ready 
for  half-past  nine!  Have  you  got  the  bath-water  hot?’ 

Sam  jumped  up,  looking  rather  bleary.  ‘No,  sir,  I  haven’t, 
sir!’  he  said. 

Frodo  stripped  the  blankets  from  Pippin  and  rolled  him 
over,  and  then  walked  off  to  the  edge  of  the  wood.  Away 
eastward  the  sun  was  rising  red  out  of  the  mists  that  lay  thick 
on  the  world.  Touched  with  gold  and  red  the  autumn  trees 
seemed  to  be  sailing  rootless  in  a  shadowy  sea.  A  little  below 
him  to  the  left  the  road  ran  down  steeply  into  a  hollow  and 
disappeared. 

When  he  returned  Sam  and  Pippin  had  got  a  good  fire 
going.  ‘Water!’  shouted  Pippin.  ‘Where’s  the  water?’ 

‘I  don’t  keep  water  in  my  pockets,’  said  Frodo. 

‘We  thought  you  had  gone  to  find  some,’  said  Pippin,  busy 
setting  out  the  food,  and  cups.  ‘You  had  better  go  now.’ 

‘You  can  come  too,’  said  Frodo,  ‘and  bring  all  the  water- 
bottles.’  There  was  a  stream  at  the  foot  of  the  hill.  They  filled 
their  bottles  and  the  small  camping  kettle  at  a  little  fall  where 
the  water  fell  a  few  feet  over  an  outcrop  of  grey  stone.  It  was 
icy  cold;  and  they  spluttered  and  puffed  as  they  bathed  their 
faces  and  hands. 

When  their  breakfast  was  over,  and  their  packs  all  trussed 
up  again,  it  was  after  ten  o’clock,  and  the  day  was  beginning 
to  turn  fine  and  hot.  They  went  down  the  slope,  and  across 
the  stream  where  it  dived  under  the  road,  and  up  the  next 
slope,  and  up  and  down  another  shoulder  of  the  hills;  and  by 
that  time  their  cloaks,  blankets,  water,  food,  and  other  gear 
already  seemed  a  heavy  burden. 

The  day’s  march  promised  to  be  warm  and  tiring  work. 
After  some  miles,  however,  the  road  ceased  to  roll  up  and 
down:  it  climbed  to  the  top  of  a  steep  bank  in  a  weary 


96 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


zig-zagging  sort  of  way,  and  then  prepared  to  go  down  for 
the  last  time.  In  front  of  them  they  saw  the  lower  lands  dotted 
with  small  clumps  of  trees  that  melted  away  in  the  distance 
to  a  brown  woodland  haze.  They  were  looking  across  the 
Woody  End  towards  the  Brandywine  River.  The  road  wound 
away  before  them  like  a  piece  of  string. 

‘The  road  goes  on  for  ever,’  said  Pippin;  ‘but  I  can’t  with¬ 
out  a  rest.  It  is  high  time  for  lunch.’  He  sat  down  on  the  bank 
at  the  side  of  the  road  and  looked  away  east  into  the  haze, 
beyond  which  lay  the  River,  and  the  end  of  the  Shire  in  which 
he  had  spent  all  his  life.  Sam  stood  by  him.  His  round  eyes 
were  wide  open  -  for  he  was  looking  across  lands  he  had 
never  seen  to  a  new  horizon. 

‘Do  Elves  live  in  those  woods?’  he  asked. 

‘Not  that  I  ever  heard,’  said  Pippin.  Frodo  was  silent.  He 
too  was  gazing  eastward  along  the  road,  as  if  he  had  never 
seen  it  before.  Suddenly  he  spoke,  aloud  but  as  if  to  himself, 
saying  slowly: 

The  Road  goes  ever  on  and  on 
Down  from  the  door  where  it  began. 

Now  far  ahead  the  Road  has  gone, 

And  I  must  follow,  if  I  can, 

Pursuing  it  with  weary  feet, 

Until  it  joins  some  larger  way, 

Where  many  paths  and  errands  meet. 

And  whither  then?  I  cannot  say. 

‘That  sounds  like  a  bit  of  old  Bilbo’s  rhyming,’  said  Pippin. 
‘Or  is  it  one  of  your  imitations?  It  does  not  sound  altogether 
encouraging.’ 

‘I  don’t  know,’  said  Frodo.  ‘It  came  to  me  then,  as  if  I  was 
making  it  up;  but  I  may  have  heard  it  long  ago.  Certainly  it 
reminds  me  very  much  of  Bilbo  in  the  last  years,  before  he 
went  away.  He  used  often  to  say  there  was  only  one  Road; 
that  it  was  like  a  great  river:  its  springs  were  at  every  doorstep, 
and  every  path  was  its  tributary.  “It’s  a  dangerous  business, 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


97 


Frodo,  going  out  of  your  door,”  he  used  to  say.  “You  step 
into  the  Road,  and  if  you  don’t  keep  your  feet,  there  is  no 
knowing  where  you  might  be  swept  off  to.  Do  you  realize 
that  this  is  the  very  path  that  goes  through  Mirkwood,  and 
that  if  you  let  it,  it  might  take  you  to  the  Lonely  Mountain 
or  even  further  and  to  worse  places?”  He  used  to  say  that  on 
the  path  outside  the  front  door  at  Bag  End,  especially  after 
he  had  been  out  for  a  long  walk.’ 

‘Well,  the  Road  won’t  sweep  me  anywhere  for  an  hour  at 
least,’  said  Pippin,  unslinging  his  pack.  The  others  followed 
his  example,  putting  their  packs  against  the  bank  and  their 
legs  out  into  the  road.  After  a  rest  they  had  a  good  lunch, 
and  then  more  rest. 

The  sun  was  beginning  to  get  low  and  the  light  of  afternoon 
was  on  the  land  as  they  went  down  the  hill.  So  far  they  had 
not  met  a  soul  on  the  road.  This  way  was  not  much  used, 
being  hardly  fit  for  carts,  and  there  was  little  traffic  to  the 
Woody  End.  They  had  been  jogging  along  again  for  an  hour 
or  more  when  Sam  stopped  a  moment  as  if  listening.  They 
were  now  on  level  ground,  and  the  road  after  much  winding 
lay  straight  ahead  through  grass-land  sprinkled  with  tall  trees, 
outliers  of  the  approaching  woods. 

‘I  can  hear  a  pony  or  a  horse  coming  along  the  road 
behind,’  said  Sam. 

They  looked  back,  but  the  turn  of  the  road  prevented  them 
from  seeing  far.  ‘I  wonder  if  that  is  Gandalf  coming  after  us,’ 
said  Frodo;  but  even  as  he  said  it,  he  had  a  feeling  that  it  was 
not  so,  and  a  sudden  desire  to  hide  from  the  view  of  the  rider 
came  over  him. 

‘It  may  not  matter  much,’  he  said  apologetically,  ‘but 
I  would  rather  not  be  seen  on  the  road  -  by  anyone.  I  am 
sick  of  my  doings  being  noticed  and  discussed.  And  if  it  is 
Gandalf,’  he  added  as  an  afterthought,  ‘we  can  give  him  a 
little  surprise,  to  pay  him  out  for  being  so  late.  Let’s  get  out 
of  sight!’ 

The  other  two  ran  quickly  to  the  left  and  down  into  a  little 


98 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


hollow  not  far  from  the  road.  There  they  lay  flat.  Frodo 
hesitated  for  a  second:  curiosity  or  some  other  feeling  was 
struggling  with  his  desire  to  hide.  The  sound  of  hoofs  drew 
nearer.  Just  in  time  he  threw  himself  down  in  a  patch  of  long 
grass  behind  a  tree  that  overshadowed  the  road.  Then  he 
lifted  his  head  and  peered  cautiously  above  one  of  the  great 
roots. 

Round  the  corner  came  a  black  horse,  no  hobbit-pony  but 
a  full-sized  horse;  and  on  it  sat  a  large  man,  who  seemed  to 
crouch  in  the  saddle,  wrapped  in  a  great  black  cloak  and 
hood,  so  that  only  his  boots  in  the  high  stirrups  showed 
below;  his  face  was  shadowed  and  invisible. 

When  it  reached  the  tree  and  was  level  with  Frodo  the 
horse  stopped.  The  riding  figure  sat  quite  still  with  its  head 
bowed,  as  if  listening.  From  inside  the  hood  came  a  noise  as 
of  someone  sniffing  to  catch  an  elusive  scent;  the  head  turned 
from  side  to  side  of  the  road. 

A  sudden  unreasoning  fear  of  discovery  laid  hold  of  Frodo, 
and  he  thought  of  his  Ring.  He  hardly  dared  to  breathe,  and 
yet  the  desire  to  get  it  out  of  his  pocket  became  so  strong  that 
he  began  slowly  to  move  his  hand.  He  felt  that  he  had  only 
to  slip  it  on,  and  then  he  would  be  safe.  The  advice  of  Gandalf 
seemed  absurd.  Bilbo  had  used  the  Ring.  ‘And  I  am  still  in 
the  Shire,’  he  thought,  as  his  hand  touched  the  chain  on 
which  it  hung.  At  that  moment  the  rider  sat  up,  and  shook 
the  reins.  The  horse  stepped  forward,  walking  slowly  at  first, 
and  then  breaking  into  a  quick  trot. 

Frodo  crawled  to  the  edge  of  the  road  and  watched  the 
rider,  until  he  dwindled  into  the  distance.  He  could  not  be 
quite  sure,  but  it  seemed  to  him  that  suddenly,  before  it 
passed  out  of  sight,  the  horse  turned  aside  and  went  into  the 
trees  on  the  right. 

Well,  I  call  that  very  queer,  and  indeed  disturbing,’  said 
Frodo  to  himself,  as  he  walked  towards  his  companions. 
Pippin  and  Sam  had  remained  flat  in  the  grass,  and  had 
seen  nothing;  so  Frodo  described  the  rider  and  his  strange 
behaviour. 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


99 


‘I  can’t  say  why,  but  I  felt  certain  he  was  looking  or  smelling 
for  me;  and  also  I  felt  certain  that  I  did  not  want  him  to 
discover  me.  I’ve  never  seen  or  felt  anything  like  it  in  the 
Shire  before.’ 

‘But  what  has  one  of  the  Big  People  got  to  do  with  us?’ 
said  Pippin.  ‘And  what  is  he  doing  in  this  part  of  the  world?’ 

‘There  are  some  Men  about,’  said  Frodo.  ‘Down  in  the 
Southfarthing  they  have  had  trouble  with  Big  People,  I 
believe.  But  I  have  never  heard  of  anything  like  this  rider. 
I  wonder  where  he  comes  from.’ 

‘Begging  your  pardon,’  put  in  Sam  suddenly,  ‘I  know 
where  he  comes  from.  It’s  from  Hobbiton  that  this  here  black 
rider  comes,  unless  there’s  more  than  one.  And  I  know  where 
he’s  going  to.’ 

‘What  do  you  mean?’  said  Frodo  sharply,  looking  at  him 
in  astonishment.  ‘Why  didn’t  you  speak  up  before?’ 

‘I  have  only  just  remembered,  sir.  It  was  like  this:  when  I 
got  back  to  our  hole  yesterday  evening  with  the  key,  my  dad, 
he  says  to  me:  Hallo,  Sam!  he  says.  I  thought  you  were  away 
with  Mr.  Frodo  this  morning.  There’s  been  a  strange  customer 
asking  for  Mr.  Baggins  of  Bag  End,  and  he’s  only  just  gone.  Eve 
sent  him  on  to  Bucklebury.  Not  that  I  liked  the  sound  of  him.  He 
seemed  mighty  put  out,  when  I  told  him  Mr.  Baggins  had  left  his 
old  home  for  good.  Hissed  at  me,  he  did.  It  gave  me  quite  a 
shudder.  What  sort  of  a  fellow  was  he?  says  I  to  the  Gaffer.  / 
don’t  know ,  says  he;  but  he  wasn’t  a  hobbit.  He  was  tall  and 
black-like,  and  he  stooped  over  me.  I  reckon  it  was  one  of  the  Big 
Folk  from  foreign  parts.  He  spoke  funny. 

‘I  couldn’t  stay  to  hear  more,  sir,  since  you  were  waiting; 
and  I  didn’t  give  much  heed  to  it  myself.  The  Gaffer  is  getting 
old,  and  more  than  a  bit  blind,  and  it  must  have  been  near 
dark  when  this  fellow  come  up  the  Hill  and  found  him  taking 
the  air  at  the  end  of  our  Row.  I  hope  he  hasn’t  done  no  harm, 
sir,  nor  me.’ 

‘The  Gaffer  can’t  be  blamed  anyway,’  said  Frodo.  ‘As  a 
matter  of  fact  I  heard  him  talking  to  a  stranger,  who  seemed 
to  be  inquiring  for  me,  and  I  nearly  went  and  asked  him  who 


IOO 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


it  was.  I  wish  I  had,  or  you  had  told  me  about  it  before.  I 
might  have  been  more  careful  on  the  road.’ 

‘Still,  there  may  be  no  connexion  between  this  rider  and 
the  Gaffer’s  stranger,’  said  Pippin.  ‘We  left  Hobbiton  secretly 
enough,  and  I  don’t  see  how  he  could  have  followed  us.’ 

‘What  about  the  smelling,  sir?’  said  Sam.  ‘And  the  Gaffer 
said  he  was  a  black  chap.’ 

‘I  wish  I  had  waited  for  Gandalf,’  Frodo  muttered.  ‘But 
perhaps  it  would  only  have  made  matters  worse.’ 

‘Then  you  know  or  guess  something  about  this  rider?’  said 
Pippin,  who  had  caught  the  muttered  words. 

‘I  don’t  know,  and  I  would  rather  not  guess,’  said  Frodo. 

‘All  right,  cousin  Frodo!  You  can  keep  your  secret  for  the 
present,  if  you  want  to  be  mysterious.  In  the  meanwhile  what 
are  we  to  do?  I  should  like  a  bite  and  a  sup,  but  somehow  I 
think  we  had  better  move  on  from  here.  Your  talk  of  sniffing 
riders  with  invisible  noses  has  unsettled  me.’ 

‘Yes,  I  think  we  will  move  on  now,’  said  Frodo;  ‘but  not 
on  the  road  -  in  case  that  rider  comes  back,  or  another  follows 
him.  We  ought  to  do  a  good  step  more  today.  Buckland  is 
still  miles  away.’ 

The  shadows  of  the  trees  were  long  and  thin  on  the  grass, 
as  they  started  off  again.  They  now  kept  a  stone’s  throw  to 
the  left  of  the  road,  and  kept  out  of  sight  of  it  as  much  as 
they  could.  But  this  hindered  them;  for  the  grass  was  thick 
and  tussocky,  and  the  ground  uneven,  and  the  trees  began  to 
draw  together  into  thickets. 

The  sun  had  gone  down  red  behind  the  hills  at  their  backs, 
and  evening  was  coming  on  before  they  came  back  to  the 
road  at  the  end  of  the  long  level  over  which  it  had  run  straight 
for  some  miles.  At  that  point  it  bent  left  and  went  down  into 
the  lowlands  of  the  Yale  making  for  Stock;  but  a  lane 
branched  right,  winding  through  a  wood  of  ancient  oak-trees 
on  its  way  to  Woodhall.  ‘That  is  the  way  for  us,’  said  Frodo. 

Not  far  from  the  road-meeting  they  came  on  the  huge  hulk 
of  a  tree:  it  was  still  alive  and  had  leaves  on  the  small  branches 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


IOI 


that  it  had  put  out  round  the  broken  stumps  of  its  long-fallen 
limbs;  but  it  was  hollow,  and  could  be  entered  by  a  great 
crack  on  the  side  away  from  the  road.  The  hobbits  crept 
inside,  and  sat  there  upon  a  floor  of  old  leaves  and  decayed 
wood.  They  rested  and  had  a  light  meal,  talking  quietly  and 
listening  from  time  to  time. 

Twilight  was  about  them  as  they  crept  back  to  the  lane. 
The  West  wind  was  sighing  in  the  branches.  Leaves  were 
whispering.  Soon  the  road  began  to  fall  gently  but  steadily 
into  the  dusk.  A  star  came  out  above  the  trees  in  the  darkening 
East  before  them.  They  went  abreast  and  in  step,  to  keep  up 
their  spirits.  After  a  time,  as  the  stars  grew  thicker  and 
brighter,  the  feeling  of  disquiet  left  them,  and  they  no  longer 
listened  for  the  sound  of  hoofs.  They  began  to  hum  softly, 
as  hobbits  have  a  way  of  doing  as  they  walk  along,  especially 
when  they  are  drawing  near  to  home  at  night.  With  most 
hobbits  it  is  a  supper-song  or  a  bed-song;  but  these  hobbits 
hummed  a  walking-song  (though  not,  of  course,  without  any 
mention  of  supper  and  bed).  Bilbo  Baggins  had  made  the 
words,  to  a  tune  that  was  as  old  as  the  hills,  and  taught  it  to 
Frodo  as  they  walked  in  the  lanes  of  the  Water- valley  and 
talked  about  Adventure. 

Upon  the  hearth  the  fire  is  red, 

Beneath  the  roof  there  is  a  bed; 

But  not  yet  weary  are  our  feet. 

Still  round  the  corner  we  may  meet 
A  sudden  tree  or  standing  stone 
That  none  have  seen  but  we  alone. 

Tree  and  flower  and  leaf  and  grass, 

Let  them  pass!  Let  them  pass! 

Hill  and  water  under  sky, 

Pass  them  by!  Pass  them  by! 

Still  round  the  corner  there  may  wait 
A  new  road  or  a  secret  gate, 

And  though  we  pass  them  by  today. 


102 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Tomorrow  we  may  come  this  way 
And  take  the  hidden  paths  that  run 
Towards  the  Moon  or  to  the  Sun. 

Apple,  thorn,  and  nut  and  sloe, 

Let  them  go!  Let  them  go! 

Sand  and  stone  and  pool  and  dell, 

Fare  you  well!  Fare  you  well! 

Home  is  behind,  the  world  ahead, 

And  there  are  many  paths  to  tread 
Through  shadows  to  the  edge  of  night, 

Until  the  stars  are  all  alight. 

Then  world  behind  and  home  ahead, 

We’ll  wander  back  to  home  and  bed. 

Mist  and  twilight,  cloud  and  shade, 

Away  shall  fade!  Away  shall  fade! 

Fire  and  lamp,  and  meat  and  bread, 

And  then  to  bed!  And  then  to  bed! 

The  song  ended.  ‘And  now  to  bed!  And  now  to  bed!’  sang 
Pippin  in  a  high  voice. 

‘Hush!’  said  Frodo.  ‘I  think  I  hear  hoofs  again.’ 

They  stopped  suddenly  and  stood  as  silent  as  tree- 
shadows,  listening.  There  was  a  sound  of  hoofs  in  the  lane, 
some  way  behind,  but  coming  slow  and  clear  down  the  wind. 
Quickly  and  quietly  they  slipped  off  the  path,  and  ran  into 
the  deeper  shade  under  the  oak-trees. 

‘Don’t  let  us  go  too  far!’  said  Frodo.  ‘I  don’t  want  to  be 
seen,  but  I  want  to  see  if  it  is  another  Black  Rider.’ 

‘Very  well!’  said  Pippin.  ‘But  don’t  forget  the  sniffing!’ 

The  hoofs  drew  nearer.  They  had  no  time  to  find  any 
hiding-place  better  than  the  general  darkness  under  the  trees; 
Sam  and  Pippin  crouched  behind  a  large  tree-bole,  while 
Frodo  crept  back  a  few  yards  towards  the  lane.  It  showed 
grey  and  pale,  a  line  of  fading  light  through  the  wood.  Above 
it  the  stars  were  thick  in  the  dim  sky,  but  there  was  no  moon. 

The  sound  of  hoofs  stopped.  As  Frodo  watched  he  saw 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


103 


something  dark  pass  across  the  lighter  space  between  two 
trees,  and  then  halt.  It  looked  like  the  black  shade  of  a  horse 
led  by  a  smaller  black  shadow.  The  black  shadow  stood  close 
to  the  point  where  they  had  left  the  path,  and  it  swayed  from 
side  to  side.  Frodo  thought  he  heard  the  sound  of  snuffling. 
The  shadow  bent  to  the  ground,  and  then  began  to  crawl 
towards  him. 

Once  more  the  desire  to  slip  on  the  Ring  came  over  Frodo; 
but  this  time  it  was  stronger  than  before.  So  strong  that, 
almost  before  he  realized  what  he  was  doing,  his  hand  was 
groping  in  his  pocket.  But  at  that  moment  there  came  a  sound 
like  mingled  song  and  laughter.  Clear  voices  rose  and  fell 
in  the  starlit  air.  The  black  shadow  straightened  up  and 
retreated.  It  climbed  on  to  the  shadowy  horse  and  seemed  to 
vanish  across  the  lane  into  the  darkness  on  the  other  side. 
Frodo  breathed  again. 

‘Elves!’  exclaimed  Sam  in  a  hoarse  whisper.  ‘Elves,  sir!’  He 
would  have  burst  out  of  the  trees  and  dashed  off  towards  the 
voices,  if  they  had  not  pulled  him  back. 

‘Yes,  it  is  Elves,’  said  Frodo.  ‘One  can  meet  them  some¬ 
times  in  the  Woody  End.  They  don’t  live  in  the  Shire,  but 
they  wander  into  it  in  spring  and  autumn,  out  of  their  own 
lands  away  beyond  the  Tower  Hills.  I  am  thankful  that  they 
do!  You  did  not  see,  but  that  Black  Rider  stopped  just  here 
and  was  actually  crawling  towards  us  when  the  song  began. 
As  soon  as  he  heard  the  voices  he  slipped  away.’ 

‘What  about  the  Elves?’  said  Sam,  too  excited  to  trouble 
about  the  rider.  ‘Can’t  we  go  and  see  them?’ 

‘Listen!  They  are  coming  this  way,’  said  Frodo.  We  have 
only  to  wait.’ 

The  singing  drew  nearer.  One  clear  voice  rose  now  above 
the  others.  It  was  singing  in  the  fair  elven- tongue,  of  which 
Frodo  knew  only  a  little,  and  the  others  knew  nothing.  Yet 
the  sound  blending  with  the  melody  seemed  to  shape  itself 
in  their  thought  into  words  which  they  only  partly  under¬ 
stood.  This  was  the  song  as  Frodo  heard  it: 


104  THE  fellowship  of  the  ring 

Snow-white!  Snow-white!  O  Lady  clear! 

O  Queen  beyond  the  Western  Seas! 

O  Light  to  us  that  wander  here 
Amid  the  world  of  woven  trees! 

Gilthoniel!  O  Elbereth! 

Clear  are  thy  eyes  and  bright  thy  breath! 

Snow-white!  Snow-white!  We  sing  to  thee 
In  a  far  land  beyond  the  Sea. 

O  stars  that  in  the  Sunless  Year 

With  shining  hand  by  her  were  sown, 

In  windy  fields  now  bright  and  clear 
We  see  your  silver  blossom  blown! 

O  Elbereth!  Gilthoniel! 

We  still  remember,  we  who  dwell 

In  this  far  land  beneath  the  trees, 

Thy  starlight  on  the  Western  Seas. 

The  song  ended.  ‘These  are  High  Elves!  They  spoke  the 
name  of  Elbereth!’  said  Frodo  in  amazement.  ‘Few  of  that 
fairest  folic  are  ever  seen  in  the  Shire.  Not  many  now  remain 
in  Middle-earth,  east  of  the  Great  Sea.  This  is  indeed  a 
strange  chance!’ 

The  hobbits  sat  in  shadow  by  the  wayside.  Before  long  the 
Elves  came  down  the  lane  towards  the  valley.  They  passed 
slowly,  and  the  hobbits  could  see  the  starlight  glimmering  on 
their  hair  and  in  their  eyes.  They  bore  no  lights,  yet  as  they 
walked  a  shimmer,  like  the  light  of  the  moon  above  the  rim 
of  the  hills  before  it  rises,  seemed  to  fall  about  their  feet.  They 
were  now  silent,  and  as  the  last  Elf  passed  he  turned  and 
looked  towards  the  hobbits  and  laughed. 

‘Hail,  Frodo!’  he  cried.  ‘You  are  abroad  late.  Or  are  you 
perhaps  lost?’  Then  he  called  aloud  to  the  others,  and  all  the 
company  stopped  and  gathered  round. 

‘This  is  indeed  wonderful!’  they  said.  ‘Three  hobbits  in  a 


THREE  IS  COMPANY  105 

wood  at  night!  We  have  not  seen  such  a  thing  since  Bilbo 
went  away.  What  is  the  meaning  of  it?’ 

‘The  meaning  of  it,  fair  people,’  said  Frodo,  ‘is  simply  that 
we  seem  to  be  going  the  same  way  as  you  are.  I  like  walking 
under  the  stars.  But  I  would  welcome  your  company.’ 

‘But  we  have  no  need  of  other  company,  and  hobbits  are 
so  dull,’  they  laughed.  ‘And  how  do  you  know  that  we  go  the 
same  way  as  you,  for  you  do  not  know  whither  we  are  going?’ 

‘And  how  do  you  know  my  name?’  asked  Frodo  in  return. 

‘We  know  many  things,’  they  said.  We  have  seen  you 
often  before  with  Bilbo,  though  you  may  not  have  seen  us.’ 

Who  are  you,  and  who  is  your  lord?’  asked  Frodo. 

‘I  am  Gildor,’  answered  their  leader,  the  Elf  who  had  first 
hailed  him.  ‘Gildor  Inglorion  of  the  House  of  Finrod.  We  are 
Exiles,  and  most  of  our  kindred  have  long  ago  departed  and 
we  too  are  now  only  tarrying  here  a  while,  ere  we  return  over 
the  Great  Sea.  But  some  of  our  kinsfolk  dwell  still  in  peace 
in  Rivendell.  Come  now,  Frodo,  tell  us  what  you  are  doing? 
For  we  see  that  there  is  some  shadow  of  fear  upon  you.’ 

‘O  Wise  People!’  interrupted  Pippin  eagerly.  ‘Tell  us  about 
the  Black  Riders!’ 

‘Black  Riders?’  they  said  in  low  voices.  ‘Why  do  you  ask 
about  Black  Riders?’ 

‘Because  two  Black  Riders  have  overtaken  us  today,  or  one 
has  done  so  twice,’  said  Pippin;  ‘only  a  little  while  ago  he 
slipped  away  as  you  drew  near.’ 

The  Elves  did  not  answer  at  once,  but  spoke  together  softly 
in  their  own  tongue.  At  length  Gildor  turned  to  the  hobbits. 
We  will  not  speak  of  this  here,’  he  said.  ‘We  think  you  had 
best  come  now  with  us.  It  is  not  our  custom,  but  for  this  time 
we  will  take  you  on  our  road,  and  you  shall  lodge  with  us 
tonight,  if  you  will.’ 

‘O  Fair  Folic!  This  is  good  fortune  beyond  my  hope,’  said 
Pippin.  Sam  was  speechless.  ‘I  thank  you  indeed,  Gildor 
Inglorion,’  said  Frodo  bowing.  ‘ Elen  sila  lumenn’  omentielvo, 
a  star  shines  on  the  hour  of  our  meeting,’  he  added  in  the 
High-elven  speech. 


io6 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Be  careful,  friends!’  cried  Gildor  laughing.  ‘Speak  no 
secrets!  Here  is  a  scholar  in  the  Ancient  Tongue.  Bilbo  was 
a  good  master.  Hail,  Elf-friend!’  he  said,  bowing  to  Frodo. 
‘Come  now  with  your  friends  and  join  our  company!  You 
had  best  walk  in  the  middle  so  that  you  may  not  stray.  You 
may  be  weary  before  we  halt.’ 

‘Why?  Where  are  you  going?’  asked  Frodo. 

‘For  tonight  we  go  to  the  woods  on  the  hills  above  Wood- 
hall.  It  is  some  miles,  but  you  shall  have  rest  at  the  end  of  it, 
and  it  will  shorten  your  journey  tomorrow.’ 

They  now  marched  on  again  in  silence,  and  passed  like 
shadows  and  faint  lights:  for  Elves  (even  more  than  hobbits) 
could  walk  when  they  wished  without  sound  or  footfall. 
Pippin  soon  began  to  feel  sleepy,  and  staggered  once  or  twice; 
but  each  time  a  tall  Elf  at  his  side  put  out  his  arm  and  saved 
him  from  a  fall.  Sam  walked  along  at  Frodo’s  side,  as  if  in  a 
dream,  with  an  expression  on  his  face  half  of  fear  and  half  of 
astonished  joy. 

The  woods  on  either  side  became  denser;  the  trees  were 
now  younger  and  thicker;  and  as  the  lane  went  lower,  running 
down  into  a  fold  of  the  hills,  there  were  many  deep  brakes  of 
hazel  on  the  rising  slopes  at  either  hand.  At  last  the  Elves 
turned  aside  from  the  path.  A  green  ride  lay  almost  unseen 
through  the  thickets  on  the  right;  and  this  they  followed  as  it 
wound  away  back  up  the  wooded  slopes  on  to  the  top  of 
a  shoulder  of  the  hills  that  stood  out  into  the  lower  land 
of  the  river-valley.  Suddenly  they  came  out  of  the  shadow 
of  the  trees,  and  before  them  lay  a  wide  space  of  grass, 
grey  under  the  night.  On  three  sides  the  woods  pressed 
upon  it;  but  eastward  the  ground  fell  steeply  and  the  tops 
of  the  dark  trees,  growing  at  the  bottom  of  the  slope,  were 
below  their  feet.  Beyond,  the  low  lands  lay  dim  and  flat 
under  the  stars.  Nearer  at  hand  a  few  lights  twinkled  in  the 
village  of  Woodhall. 

The  Elves  sat  on  the  grass  and  spoke  together  in  soft  voices; 
they  seemed  to  take  no  further  notice  of  the  hobbits.  Frodo 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


107 


and  his  companions  wrapped  themselves  in  cloaks  and 
blankets,  and  drowsiness  stole  over  them.  The  night  grew  on, 
and  the  lights  in  the  valley  went  out.  Pippin  fell  asleep, 
pillowed  on  a  green  hillock. 

Away  high  in  the  East  swung  Remmirath,  the  Netted  Stars, 
and  slowly  above  the  mists  red  Borgil  rose,  glowing  like  a 
jewel  of  fire.  Then  by  some  shift  of  airs  all  the  mist  was  drawn 
away  like  a  veil,  and  there  leaned  up,  as  he  climbed  over  the 
rim  of  the  world,  the  Swordsman  of  the  Sky,  Menelvagor 
with  his  shining  belt.  The  Elves  all  burst  into  song.  Suddenly 
under  the  trees  a  fire  sprang  up  with  a  red  light. 

‘Come!’  the  Elves  called  to  the  hobbits.  ‘Come!  Now  is  the 
time  for  speech  and  merriment!’ 

Pippin  sat  up  and  rubbed  his  eyes.  He  shivered.  ‘There  is 
a  fire  in  the  hall,  and  food  for  hungry  guests,’  said  an  Elf 
standing  before  him. 

At  the  south  end  of  the  greensward  there  was  an  opening. 
There  the  green  floor  ran  on  into  the  wood,  and  formed  a 
wide  space  like  a  hall,  roofed  by  the  boughs  of  trees.  Their 
great  trunks  ran  like  pillars  down  each  side.  In  the  middle 
there  was  a  wood-fire  blazing,  and  upon  the  tree-pillars 
torches  with  lights  of  gold  and  silver  were  burning  steadily. 
The  Elves  sat  round  the  fire  upon  the  grass  or  upon  the  sawn 
rings  of  old  trunks.  Some  went  to  and  fro  bearing  cups  and 
pouring  drink;  others  brought  food  on  heaped  plates  and 
dishes. 

‘This  is  poor  fare,’  they  said  to  the  hobbits;  ‘for  we  are 
lodging  in  the  greenwood  far  from  our  halls.  If  ever  you  are 
our  guests  at  home,  we  will  treat  you  better.’ 

‘It  seems  to  me  good  enough  for  a  birthday-party,’  said 
Frodo. 

Pippin  afterwards  recalled  little  of  either  food  or  drink,  for 
his  mind  was  filled  with  the  light  upon  the  elf-faces,  and  the 
sound  of  voices  so  various  and  so  beautiful  that  he  felt  in  a 
waking  dream.  But  he  remembered  that  there  was  bread, 
surpassing  the  savour  of  a  fair  white  loaf  to  one  who  is  starv¬ 
ing;  and  fruits  sweet  as  wildberries  and  richer  than  the  tended 


io8 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


fruits  of  gardens;  he  drained  a  cup  that  was  filled  with  a 
fragrant  draught,  cool  as  a  clear  fountain,  golden  as  a  summer 
afternoon. 

Sam  could  never  describe  in  words,  nor  picture  clearly  to 
himself,  what  he  felt  or  thought  that  night,  though  it  remained 
in  his  memory  as  one  of  the  chief  events  of  his  life.  The 
nearest  he  ever  got  was  to  say:  ‘Well,  sir,  if  I  could  grow 
apples  like  that,  I  would  call  myself  a  gardener.  But  it  was 
the  singing  that  went  to  my  heart,  if  you  know  what  I  mean.’ 

Frodo  sat,  eating,  drinking,  and  talking  with  delight;  but 
his  mind  was  chiefly  on  the  words  spoken.  He  knew  a  little 
of  the  elf-speech  and  listened  eagerly.  Now  and  again  he 
spoke  to  those  that  served  him  and  thanked  them  in  their 
own  language.  They  smiled  at  him  and  said  laughing:  ‘Here 
is  a  jewel  among  hobbits!’ 

After  a  while  Pippin  fell  fast  asleep,  and  was  lifted  up  and 
borne  away  to  a  bower  under  the  trees;  there  he  was  laid 
upon  a  soft  bed  and  slept  the  rest  of  the  night  away.  Sam 
refused  to  leave  his  master.  When  Pippin  had  gone,  he  came 
and  sat  curled  up  at  Frodo’s  feet,  where  at  last  he  nodded 
and  closed  his  eyes.  Frodo  remained  long  awake,  talking  with 
Gildor. 

They  spoke  of  many  things,  old  and  new,  and  Frodo  ques¬ 
tioned  Gildor  much  about  happenings  in  the  wide  world 
outside  the  Shire.  The  tidings  were  mostly  sad  and  ominous: 
of  gathering  darkness,  the  wars  of  Men,  and  the  flight  of  the 
Elves.  At  last  Frodo  asked  the  question  that  was  nearest  to 
his  heart: 

‘Tell  me,  Gildor,  have  you  ever  seen  Bilbo  since  he  left  us?’ 

Gildor  smiled.  ‘Yes,’  he  answered.  ‘Twice.  He  said  farewell 
to  us  on  this  very  spot.  But  I  saw  him  once  again,  far  from 
here.’  He  would  say  no  more  about  Bilbo,  and  Frodo  fell 
silent. 

‘You  do  not  ask  me  or  tell  me  much  that  concerns  yourself, 
Frodo,’  said  Gildor.  ‘But  I  already  know  a  little,  and  I  can 
read  more  in  your  face  and  in  the  thought  behind  your  ques- 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


109 


tions.  You  are  leaving  the  Shire,  and  yet  you  doubt  that  you 
will  find  what  you  seek,  or  accomplish  what  you  intend,  or 
that  you  will  ever  return.  Is  not  that  so?’ 

‘It  is,’  said  Frodo;  ‘but  I  thought  my  going  was  a  secret 
known  only  to  Gandalf  and  my  faithful  Sam.’  He  looked 
down  at  Sam,  who  was  snoring  gently. 

‘The  secret  will  not  reach  the  Enemy  from  us,’  said  Gildor. 

‘The  Enemy?’  said  Frodo.  ‘Then  you  know  why  I  am 
leaving  the  Shire?’ 

‘I  do  not  know  for  what  reason  the  Enemy  is  pursuing 
you,’  answered  Gildor;  ‘but  I  perceive  that  he  is  -  strange 
indeed  though  that  seems  to  me.  And  I  warn  you  that  peril 
is  now  both  before  you  and  behind  you,  and  upon  either 
side.’ 

‘You  mean  the  Riders?  I  feared  that  they  were  servants  of 
the  Enemy.  What  are  the  Black  Riders?’ 

‘Has  Gandalf  told  you  nothing?’ 

‘Nothing  about  such  creatures.’ 

‘Then  I  think  it  is  not  for  me  to  say  more  -  lest  terror 
should  keep  you  from  your  journey.  For  it  seems  to  me  that 
you  have  set  out  only  just  in  time,  if  indeed  you  are  in  time. 
You  must  now  make  haste,  and  neither  stay  nor  turn  back; 
for  the  Shire  is  no  longer  any  protection  to  you.’ 

‘I  cannot  imagine  what  information  could  be  more  terrify¬ 
ing  than  your  hints  and  warnings,’  exclaimed  Frodo.  ‘I  knew 
that  danger  lay  ahead,  of  course;  but  I  did  not  expect  to  meet 
it  in  our  own  Shire.  Can’t  a  hobbit  walk  from  the  Water  to 
the  River  in  peace?’ 

‘But  it  is  not  your  own  Shire,’  said  Gildor.  ‘Others  dwelt 
here  before  hobbits  were;  and  others  will  dwell  here  again 
when  hobbits  are  no  more.  The  wide  world  is  all  about  you: 
you  can  fence  yourselves  in,  but  you  cannot  for  ever  fence 
it  out.’ 

‘I  know  -  and  yet  it  has  always  seemed  so  safe  and  familiar. 
What  can  I  do  now?  My  plan  was  to  leave  the  Shire  secretly, 
and  make  my  way  to  Rivendell;  but  now  my  footsteps  are 
dogged,  before  ever  I  get  to  Buckland.’ 


no 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘I  think  you  should  still  follow  that  plan,’  said  Gildor.  ‘I  do 
not  think  the  Road  will  prove  too  hard  for  your  courage.  But 
if  you  desire  clearer  counsel,  you  should  ask  Gandalf.  I  do 
not  know  the  reason  for  your  flight,  and  therefore  I  do  not 
know  by  what  means  your  pursuers  will  assail  you.  These 
things  Gandalf  must  know.  I  suppose  that  you  will  see  him 
before  you  leave  the  Shire?’ 

‘I  hope  so.  But  that  is  another  thing  that  makes  me  anxious. 
I  have  been  expecting  Gandalf  for  many  days.  He  was  to 
have  come  to  Hobbiton  at  the  latest  two  nights  ago;  but  he 
has  never  appeared.  Now  I  am  wondering  what  can  have 
happened.  Should  I  wait  for  him?’ 

Gildor  was  silent  for  a  moment.  ‘I  do  not  like  this  news,’ 
he  said  at  last.  ‘That  Gandalf  should  be  late,  does  not  bode 
well.  But  it  is  said:  Do  not  meddle  in  the  affairs  of  Wizards ,  for 
they  are  subtle  and  quick  to  anger.  The  choice  is  yours:  to  go 
or  wait.’ 

‘And  it  is  also  said,’  answered  Frodo:  ‘Go  not  to  the  Elves 
for  counsel,  for  they  will  say  both  no  and  yes.’ 

‘Is  it  indeed?’  laughed  Gildor.  ‘Elves  seldom  give  un¬ 
guarded  advice,  for  advice  is  a  dangerous  gift,  even  from  the 
wise  to  the  wise,  and  all  courses  may  run  ill.  But  what  would 
you?  You  have  not  told  me  all  concerning  yourself;  and  how 
then  shall  I  choose  better  than  you?  But  if  you  demand  advice, 
I  will  for  friendship’s  sake  give  it.  I  think  you  should  now 
go  at  once,  without  delay;  and  if  Gandalf  does  not  come 
before  you  set  out,  then  I  also  advise  this:  do  not  go  alone. 
Take  such  friends  as  are  trusty  and  willing.  Now  you  should 
be  grateful,  for  I  do  not  give  this  counsel  gladly.  The  Elves 
have  their  own  labours  and  their  own  sorrows,  and  they  are 
little  concerned  with  the  ways  of  hobbits,  or  of  any  other 
creatures  upon  earth.  Our  paths  cross  theirs  seldom,  by 
chance  or  purpose.  In  this  meeting  there  may  be  more  than 
chance;  but  the  purpose  is  not  clear  to  me,  and  I  fear  to  say 
too  much.’ 

‘I  am  deeply  grateful,’  said  Frodo;  ‘but  I  wish  you  would 
tell  me  plainly  what  the  Black  Riders  are.  If  I  take  your  advice 


THREE  IS  COMPANY 


III 


I  may  not  see  Gandalf  for  a  long  while,  and  I  ought  to  know 
what  is  the  danger  that  pursues  me.’ 

‘Is  it  not  enough  to  know  that  they  are  servants  of  the 
Enemy?’  answered  Gildor.  ‘Flee  them!  Speak  no  words  to 
them!  They  are  deadly.  Ask  no  more  of  me!  But  my  heart 
forbodes  that,  ere  all  is  ended,  you,  Frodo  son  of  Drogo,  will 
know  more  of  these  fell  things  than  Gildor  Inglorion.  May 
Elbereth  protect  you!’ 

‘But  where  shall  I  find  courage?’  asked  Frodo.  ‘That  is 
what  I  chiefly  need.’ 

‘Courage  is  found  in  unlikely  places,’  said  Gildor.  ‘Be  of 
good  hope!  Sleep  now!  In  the  morning  we  shall  have  gone;  but 
we  will  send  our  messages  through  the  lands.  The  Wandering 
Companies  shall  know  of  your  journey,  and  those  that  have 
power  for  good  shall  be  on  the  watch.  I  name  you  Elf-friend; 
and  may  the  stars  shine  upon  the  end  of  your  road!  Seldom 
have  we  had  such  delight  in  strangers,  and  it  is  fair  to  hear 
words  of  the  Ancient  Speech  from  the  lips  of  other  wanderers 
in  the  world.’ 

Frodo  felt  sleep  coming  upon  him,  even  as  Gildor  finished 
speaking.  ‘I  will  sleep  now,’  he  said;  and  the  Elf  led  him  to  a 
bower  beside  Pippin,  and  he  threw  himself  upon  a  bed  and 
fell  at  once  into  a  dreamless  slumber. 


Chapter  4 


A  SHORT  CUT  TO  MUSHROOMS 


In  the  morning  Frodo  woke  refreshed.  He  was  lying  in  a 
bower  made  by  a  living  tree  with  branches  laced  and  drooping 
to  the  ground;  his  bed  was  of  fern  and  grass,  deep  and  soft 
and  strangely  fragrant.  The  sun  was  shining  through  the 
fluttering  leaves,  which  were  still  green  upon  the  tree.  He 
jumped  up  and  went  out. 

Sam  was  sitting  on  the  grass  near  the  edge  of  the  wood. 
Pippin  was  standing  studying  the  sky  and  weather.  There 
was  no  sign  of  the  Elves. 

‘They  have  left  us  fruit  and  drink,  and  bread,’  said  Pippin. 
‘Come  and  have  your  breakfast.  The  bread  tastes  almost  as 
good  as  it  did  last  night.  I  did  not  want  to  leave  you  any,  but 
Sam  insisted.’ 

Frodo  sat  down  beside  Sam  and  began  to  eat.  ‘What  is  the 
plan  for  today?’  asked  Pippin. 

‘To  walk  to  Bucklebury  as  quickly  as  possible,’  answered 
Frodo,  and  gave  his  attention  to  the  food. 

‘Do  you  think  we  shall  see  anything  of  those  Riders?’  asked 
Pippin  cheerfully.  Under  the  morning  sun  the  prospect  of 
seeing  a  whole  troop  of  them  did  not  seem  very  alarming  to 
him. 

‘Yes,  probably,’  said  Frodo,  not  liking  the  reminder.  ‘But 
I  hope  to  get  across  the  river  without  their  seeing  us.’ 

‘Did  you  find  out  anything  about  them  from  Gildor?’ 

‘Not  much  -  only  hints  and  riddles,’  said  Frodo  evasively. 

‘Did  you  ask  about  the  sniffing?’ 

‘We  didn’t  discuss  it,’  said  Frodo  with  his  mouth  full. 

‘You  should  have.  I  am  sure  it  is  very  important.’ 

‘In  that  case  I  am  sure  Gildor  would  have  refused  to  explain 
it,’  said  Frodo  sharply.  ‘And  now  leave  me  in  peace  for  a  bit! 


A  SHORT  CUT  TO  MUSHROOMS  113 

I  don’t  want  to  answer  a  string  of  questions  while  I  am  eating. 
I  want  to  think!’ 

‘Good  heavens!’  said  Pippin.  ‘At  breakfast?’  He  walked 
away  towards  the  edge  of  the  green. 

From  Frodo’s  mind  the  bright  morning  -  treacherously 
bright,  he  thought  -  had  not  banished  the  fear  of  pursuit;  and 
he  pondered  the  words  of  Gildor.  The  merry  voice  of  Pippin 
came  to  him.  He  was  running  on  the  green  turf  and  singing. 

‘No!  I  could  not!’  he  said  to  himself.  ‘It  is  one  thing  to  take 
my  young  friends  walking  over  the  Shire  with  me,  until  we 
are  hungry  and  weary,  and  food  and  bed  are  sweet.  To  take 
them  into  exile,  where  hunger  and  weariness  may  have  no 
cure,  is  quite  another  -  even  if  they  are  willing  to  come.  The 
inheritance  is  mine  alone.  I  don’t  think  I  ought  even  to  take 
Sam.’  He  looked  at  Sam  Gamgee,  and  discovered  that  Sam 
was  watching  him. 

‘Well,  Sam!’  he  said.  ‘What  about  it?  I  am  leaving  the  Shire 
as  soon  as  ever  I  can  -  in  fact  I  have  made  up  my  mind  now 
not  even  to  wait  a  day  at  Crickhollow,  if  it  can  be  helped.’ 

‘Very  good,  sir!’ 

‘You  still  mean  to  come  with  me?’ 

‘I  do.’ 

‘It  is  going  to  be  very  dangerous,  Sam.  It  is  already  danger¬ 
ous.  Most  likely  neither  of  us  will  come  back.’ 

‘If  you  don’t  come  back,  sir,  then  I  shan’t,  that’s  certain,’ 
said  Sam.  'Don’t  you  leave  him!  they  said  to  me.  Leave  him! 
I  said.  I  never  mean  to.  I  am  going  with  him,  if  he  climbs  to  the 
Moon ;  and  if  any  of  those  Black  Riders  try  to  stop  him,  they’ll 
have  Sam  Gamgee  to  reckon  with,  I  said.  They  laughed.’ 

‘Who  are  they,  and  what  are  you  talking  about?’ 

‘The  Elves,  sir.  We  had  some  talk  last  night;  and  they 
seemed  to  know  you  were  going  away,  so  I  didn’t  see  the  use 
of  denying  it.  Wonderful  folk,  Elves,  sir!  Wonderful!’ 

‘They  are,’  said  Frodo.  ‘Do  you  like  them  still,  now  you 
have  had  a  closer  view?’ 

‘They  seem  a  bit  above  my  likes  and  dislikes,  so  to  speak,’ 
answered  Sam  slowly.  ‘It  don’t  seem  to  matter  what  I  think 


114  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

about  them.  They  are  quite  different  from  what  I  expected  - 
so  old  and  young,  and  so  gay  and  sad,  as  it  were.’ 

Frodo  looked  at  Sam  rather  startled,  half  expecting  to  see 
some  outward  sign  of  the  odd  change  that  seemed  to  have 
come  over  him.  It  did  not  sound  like  the  voice  of  the  old  Sam 
Gamgee  that  he  thought  he  knew.  But  it  looked  like  the  old 
Sam  Gamgee  sitting  there,  except  that  his  face  was  unusually 
thoughtful. 

‘Do  you  feel  any  need  to  leave  the  Shire  now  -  now  that 
your  wish  to  see  them  has  come  true  already?’  he  asked. 

‘Yes,  sir.  I  don’t  know  how  to  say  it,  but  after  last  night 
I  feel  different.  I  seem  to  see  ahead,  in  a  kind  of  way.  I  know 
we  are  going  to  take  a  very  long  road,  into  darkness;  but 
I  know  I  can’t  turn  back.  It  isn’t  to  see  Elves  now,  nor 
dragons,  nor  mountains,  that  I  want  -  I  don’t  rightly  know 
what  I  want:  but  I  have  something  to  do  before  the  end,  and 
it  lies  ahead,  not  in  the  Shire.  I  must  see  it  through,  sir,  if 
you  understand  me.’ 

‘I  don’t  altogether.  But  I  understand  that  Gandalf  chose 
me  a  good  companion.  I  am  content.  We  will  go  together.’ 

Frodo  finished  his  breakfast  in  silence.  Then  standing  up 
he  looked  over  the  land  ahead,  and  called  to  Pippin. 

‘All  ready  to  start?’  he  said  as  Pippin  ran  up.  ‘We  must  be 
getting  off  at  once.  We  slept  late;  and  there  are  a  good  many 
miles  to  go.’ 

‘  You  slept  late,  you  mean,’  said  Pippin.  ‘I  was  up  long 
before;  and  we  are  only  waiting  for  you  to  finish  eating  and 
thinking.’ 

‘I  have  finished  both  now.  And  I  am  going  to  make  for 
Bucklebury  Ferry  as  quickly  as  possible.  I  am  not  going  out 
of  the  way,  back  to  the  road  we  left  last  night:  I  am  going  to 
cut  straight  across  country  from  here.’ 

‘Then  you  are  going  to  fly,’  said  Pippin.  ‘You  won’t  cut 
straight  on  foot  anywhere  in  this  country.’ 

‘We  can  cut  straighter  than  the  road  anyway,’  answered 
Frodo.  ‘The  Ferry  is  east  from  Woodhall;  but  the  hard  road 
curves  away  to  the  left  -  you  can  see  a  bend  of  it  away  north 


A  SHORT  CUT  TO  MUSHROOMS  115 

over  there.  It  goes  round  the  north  end  of  the  Marish  so  as 
to  strike  the  causeway  from  the  Bridge  above  Stock.  But  that 
is  miles  out  of  the  way.  We  could  save  a  quarter  of  the 
distance  if  we  made  a  line  for  the  Ferry  from  where  we  stand.’ 

‘ Short  cuts  make  long  delays ,’  argued  Pippin.  ‘The  country 
is  rough  round  here,  and  there  are  bogs  and  all  lands  of 
difficulties  down  in  the  Marish  -  I  know  the  land  in  these 
parts.  And  if  you  are  worrying  about  Black  Riders,  I  can’t 
see  that  it  is  any  worse  meeting  them  on  a  road  than  in  a 
wood  or  a  field.’ 

‘It  is  less  easy  to  find  people  in  the  woods  and  fields,’ 
answered  Frodo.  ‘And  if  you  are  supposed  to  be  on  the  road, 
there  is  some  chance  that  you  will  be  looked  for  on  the  road 
and  not  off  it.’ 

‘All  right!’  said  Pippin.  ‘I  will  follow  you  into  every  bog 
and  ditch.  But  it  is  hard!  I  had  counted  on  passing  the  Golden 
Perch  at  Stock  before  sundown.  The  best  beer  in  the  East¬ 
farthing,  or  used  to  be:  it  is  a  long  time  since  I  tasted  it.’ 

‘That  settles  it!’  said  Frodo.  ‘Short  cuts  make  delays,  but 
inns  make  longer  ones.  At  all  costs  we  must  keep  you  away 
from  the  Golden  Perch.  We  want  to  get  to  Bucklebury  before 
dark.  What  do  you  say,  Sam?’ 

‘I  will  go  along  with  you,  Mr.  Frodo,’  said  Sam  (in  spite 
of  private  misgivings  and  a  deep  regret  for  the  best  beer  in 
the  Eastfarthing) . 

‘Then  if  we  are  going  to  toil  through  bog  and  briar,  let’s 
go  now!’  said  Pippin. 

It  was  already  nearly  as  hot  as  it  had  been  the  day  before; 
but  clouds  were  beginning  to  come  up  from  the  West.  It 
looked  likely  to  turn  to  rain.  The  hobbits  scrambled  down  a 
steep  green  bank  and  plunged  into  the  thick  trees  below. 
Their  course  had  been  chosen  to  leave  Woodhall  to  their  left, 
and  to  cut  slanting  through  the  woods  that  clustered  along 
the  eastern  side  of  the  hills,  until  they  reached  the  flats 
beyond.  Then  they  could  make  straight  for  the  Ferry  over 
country  that  was  open,  except  for  a  few  ditches  and  fences. 


Il6  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

Frodo  reckoned  they  had  eighteen  miles  to  go  in  a  straight  line. 

He  soon  found  that  the  thicket  was  closer  and  more  tangled 
than  it  had  appeared.  There  were  no  paths  in  the  under¬ 
growth,  and  they  did  not  get  on  very  fast.  When  they  had 
struggled  to  the  bottom  of  the  bank,  they  found  a  stream 
running  down  from  the  hills  behind  in  a  deeply  dug  bed  with 
steep  slippery  sides  overhung  with  brambles.  Most  incon¬ 
veniently  it  cut  across  the  line  they  had  chosen.  They  could 
not  jump  over  it,  nor  indeed  get  across  it  at  all  without  getting 
wet,  scratched,  and  muddy.  They  halted,  wondering  what  to 
do.  ‘First  check!’  said  Pippin,  smiling  grimly. 

Sam  Gamgee  looked  back.  Through  an  opening  in  the 
trees  he  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  top  of  the  green  bank  from 
which  they  had  climbed  down. 

‘Look!’  he  said,  clutching  Frodo  by  the  arm.  They  all 
looked,  and  on  the  edge  high  above  them  they  saw  against 
the  sky  a  horse  standing.  Beside  it  stooped  a  black  figure. 

They  at  once  gave  up  any  idea  of  going  back.  Frodo  led 
the  way,  and  plunged  quickly  into  the  thick  bushes  beside  the 
stream.  ‘Whew!’  he  said  to  Pippin.  We  were  both  right!  The 
short  cut  has  gone  crooked  already;  but  we  got  under  cover 
only  just  in  time.  You’ve  got  sharp  ears,  Sam:  can  you  hear 
anything  coming?’ 

They  stood  still,  almost  holding  their  breath  as  they 
listened;  but  there  was  no  sound  of  pursuit.  ‘I  don’t  fancy 
he  would  try  bringing  his  horse  down  that  bank,’  said  Sam. 
‘But  I  guess  he  knows  we  came  down  it.  We  had  better  be 
going  on.’ 

Going  on  was  not  altogether  easy.  They  had  packs  to  carry, 
and  the  bushes  and  brambles  were  reluctant  to  let  them 
through.  They  were  cut  off  from  the  wind  by  the  ridge 
behind,  and  the  air  was  still  and  stuffy.  When  they  forced 
their  way  at  last  into  more  open  ground,  they  were  hot  and 
tired  and  very  scratched,  and  they  were  also  no  longer  certain 
of  the  direction  in  which  they  were  going.  The  banks  of  the 
stream  sank,  as  it  reached  the  levels  and  became  broader  and 
shallower,  wandering  off  towards  the  Marish  and  the  River. 


A  SHORT  CUT  TO  MUSHROOMS  117 

‘Why,  this  is  the  Stock-brook!’  said  Pippin.  ‘If  we  are  going 
to  try  and  get  back  on  to  our  course,  we  must  cross  at  once 
and  bear  right.’ 

They  waded  the  stream,  and  hurried  over  a  wide  open 
space,  rush-grown  and  treeless,  on  the  further  side.  Beyond 
that  they  came  again  to  a  belt  of  trees:  tall  oaks,  for  the  most 
part,  with  here  and  there  an  elm  tree  or  an  ash.  The  ground 
was  fairly  level,  and  there  was  little  undergrowth;  but  the 
trees  were  too  close  for  them  to  see  far  ahead.  The  leaves 
blew  upwards  in  sudden  gusts  of  wind,  and  spots  of  rain 
began  to  fall  from  the  overcast  sky.  Then  the  wind  died  away 
and  the  rain  came  streaming  down.  They  trudged  along  as 
fast  as  they  could,  over  patches  of  grass,  and  through  thick 
drifts  of  old  leaves;  and  all  about  them  the  rain  pattered  and 
trickled.  They  did  not  talk,  but  kept  glancing  back,  and  from 
side  to  side. 

After  half  an  hour  Pippin  said:  ‘I  hope  we  have  not  turned 
too  much  towards  the  south,  and  are  not  walking  longwise 
through  this  wood!  It  is  not  a  very  broad  belt  -  I  should  have 
said  no  more  than  a  mile  at  the  widest  -  and  we  ought  to 
have  been  through  it  by  now.’ 

‘It  is  no  good  our  starting  to  go  in  zig-zags,’  said  Frodo. 
‘That  won’t  mend  matters.  Let  us  keep  on  as  we  are  going! 
I  am  not  sure  that  I  want  to  come  out  into  the  open  yet.’ 

They  went  on  for  perhaps  another  couple  of  miles.  Then 
the  sun  gleamed  out  of  ragged  clouds  again  and  the  rain 
lessened.  It  was  now  past  mid-day,  and  they  felt  it  was  high 
time  for  lunch.  They  halted  under  an  elm  tree:  its  leaves 
though  fast  turning  yellow  were  still  thick,  and  the  ground  at 
its  feet  was  fairly  dry  and  sheltered.  When  they  came  to  make 
their  meal,  they  found  that  the  Elves  had  filled  their  bottles 
with  a  clear  drink,  pale  golden  in  colour:  it  had  the  scent  of 
a  honey  made  of  many  flowers,  and  was  wonderfully  refresh¬ 
ing.  Very  soon  they  were  laughing,  and  snapping  their  fingers 
at  rain,  and  at  Black  Riders.  The  last  few  miles,  they  felt, 
would  soon  be  behind  them. 


Il8  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

Frodo  propped  his  back  against  the  tree-trunk,  and  closed 
his  eyes.  Sam  and  Pippin  sat  near,  and  they  began  to  hum, 
and  then  to  sing  softly: 

Ho!  Ho!  Ho!  to  the  bottle  I  go 
To  heal  my  heart  and  drown  my  woe. 

Rain  may  fall  and  wind  may  blow, 

And  many  miles  be  still  to  go, 

But  under  a  tall  tree  I  will  lie, 

And  let  the  clouds  go  sailing  by. 

Ho!  Ho!  Ho!  they  began  again  louder.  They  stopped  short 
suddenly.  Frodo  sprang  to  his  feet.  A  long-drawn  wail  came 
down  the  wind,  like  the  cry  of  some  evil  and  lonely  creature. 
It  rose  and  fell,  and  ended  on  a  high  piercing  note.  Even  as 
they  sat  and  stood,  as  if  suddenly  frozen,  it  was  answered  by 
another  cry,  fainter  and  further  off,  but  no  less  chilling  to  the 
blood.  There  was  then  a  silence,  broken  only  by  the  sound 
of  the  wind  in  the  leaves. 

‘And  what  do  you  think  that  was?’  Pippin  asked  at  last, 
trying  to  speak  lightly,  but  quavering  a  little.  ‘If  it  was  a  bird, 
it  was  one  that  I  never  heard  in  the  Shire  before.’ 

‘It  was  not  bird  or  beast,’  said  Frodo.  ‘It  was  a  call,  or  a 
signal  -  there  were  words  in  that  cry,  though  I  could  not 
catch  them.  But  no  hobbit  has  such  a  voice.’ 

No  more  was  said  about  it.  They  were  all  thinking  of  the 
Riders,  but  no  one  spoke  of  them.  They  were  now  reluctant 
either  to  stay  or  go  on;  but  sooner  or  later  they  had  got  to  get 
across  the  open  country  to  the  Ferry,  and  it  was  best  to  go 
sooner  and  in  daylight.  In  a  few  moments  they  had  shoul¬ 
dered  their  packs  again  and  were  off. 

Before  long  the  wood  came  to  a  sudden  end.  Wide  grass¬ 
lands  stretched  before  them.  They  now  saw  that  they  had,  in 
fact,  turned  too  much  to  the  south.  Away  over  the  flats  they 
could  glimpse  the  low  hill  of  Bucklebury  across  the  River, 
but  it  was  now  to  their  left.  Creeping  cautiously  out  from  the 


A  SHORT  CUT  TO  MUSHROOMS  119 

edge  of  the  trees,  they  set  off  across  the  open  as  quickly  as 
they  could. 

At  first  they  felt  afraid,  away  from  the  shelter  of  the  wood. 
Far  back  behind  them  stood  the  high  place  where  they  had 
breakfasted.  Frodo  half  expected  to  see  the  small  distant 
figure  of  a  horseman  on  the  ridge  dark  against  the  sky;  but 
there  was  no  sign  of  one.  The  sun  escaping  from  the  breaking 
clouds,  as  it  sank  towards  the  hills  they  had  left,  was  now 
shining  brightly  again.  Their  fear  left  them,  though  they  still 
felt  uneasy.  But  the  land  became  steadily  more  tame  and 
well-ordered.  Soon  they  came  into  well-tended  fields  and 
meadows:  there  were  hedges  and  gates  and  dikes  for  drainage. 
Everything  seemed  quiet  and  peaceful,  just  an  ordinary 
corner  of  the  Shire.  Their  spirits  rose  with  every  step.  The 
line  of  the  River  grew  nearer;  and  the  Black  Riders  began  to 
seem  like  phantoms  of  the  woods  now  left  far  behind. 

They  passed  along  the  edge  of  a  huge  turnip-field,  and 
came  to  a  stout  gate.  Beyond  it  a  rutted  lane  ran  between  low 
well-laid  hedges  towards  a  distant  clump  of  trees.  Pippin 
stopped. 

‘I  know  these  fields  and  this  gate!’  he  said.  ‘This  is  Bam- 
furlong,  old  Farmer  Maggot’s  land.  That’s  his  farm  away 
there  in  the  trees.’ 

‘One  trouble  after  another!’  said  Frodo,  looking  nearly  as 
much  alarmed  as  if  Pippin  had  declared  the  lane  was  the 
slot  leading  to  a  dragon’s  den.  The  others  looked  at  him  in 
surprise. 

‘What’s  wrong  with  old  Maggot?’  asked  Pippin.  ‘He’s  a 
good  friend  to  all  the  Brandybucks.  Of  course  he’s  a  terror 
to  trespassers,  and  keeps  ferocious  dogs  -  but  after  all,  folk 
down  here  are  near  the  border  and  have  to  be  more  on  their 
guard.’ 

‘I  know,’  said  Frodo.  ‘But  all  the  same,’  he  added  with  a 
shamefaced  laugh,  ‘I  am  terrified  of  him  and  his  dogs.  I  have 
avoided  his  farm  for  years  and  years.  He  caught  me  several 
times  trespassing  after  mushrooms,  when  I  was  a  youngster 
at  Brandy  Hall.  On  the  last  occasion  he  beat  me,  and  then 


120 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


took  me  and  showed  me  to  his  dogs.  “See,  lads,”  he  said, 
“next  time  this  young  varmint  sets  foot  on  my  land,  you  can 
eat  him.  Now  see  him  off!”  They  chased  me  all  the  way  to 
the  Ferry.  I  have  never  got  over  the  fright  -  though  I  daresay 
the  beasts  knew  their  business  and  would  not  really  have 
touched  me.’ 

Pippin  laughed.  ‘Well,  it’s  time  you  made  it  up.  Especially 
if  you  are  coming  back  to  live  in  Buckland.  Old  Maggot  is 
really  a  stout  fellow  -  if  you  leave  his  mushrooms  alone.  Let’s 
get  into  the  lane  and  then  we  shan’t  be  trespassing.  If  we 
meet  him,  I’ll  do  the  talking.  He  is  a  friend  of  Merry’s,  and  I 
used  to  come  here  with  him  a  good  deal  at  one  time.’ 

They  went  along  the  lane,  until  they  saw  the  thatched  roofs 
of  a  large  house  and  farm-buildings  peeping  out  among  the 
trees  ahead.  The  Maggots,  and  the  Puddifoots  of  Stock,  and 
most  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Marish,  were  house-dwellers; 
and  this  farm  was  stoutly  built  of  brick  and  had  a  high  wall 
all  round  it.  There  was  a  wide  wooden  gate  opening  out  of 
the  wall  into  the  lane. 

Suddenly  as  they  drew  nearer  a  terrific  baying  and  barking 
broke  out,  and  a  loud  voice  was  heard  shouting:  ‘Grip!  Fang! 
Wolf!  Come  on,  lads!’ 

Frodo  and  Sam  stopped  dead,  but  Pippin  walked  on  a  few 
paces.  The  gate  opened  and  three  huge  dogs  came  pelting 
out  into  the  lane,  and  dashed  towards  the  travellers,  barking 
fiercely.  They  took  no  notice  of  Pippin;  but  Sam  shrank 
against  the  wall,  while  two  wolvish-looking  dogs  sniffed  at 
him  suspiciously,  and  snarled  if  he  moved.  The  largest  and 
most  ferocious  of  the  three  halted  in  front  of  Frodo,  bristling 
and  growling. 

Through  the  gate  there  now  appeared  a  broad  thick-set 
hobbit  with  a  round  red  face.  ‘Hallo!  Hallo!  And  who  may 
you  be,  and  what  may  you  be  wanting?’  he  asked. 

‘Good  afternoon,  Mr.  Maggot!’  said  Pippin. 

The  farmer  looked  at  him  closely.  Well,  if  it  isn’t  Master 
Pippin  -  Mr.  Peregrin  Took,  I  should  say!’  he  cried,  changing 


A  SHORT  CUT  TO  MUSHROOMS 


121 


from  a  scowl  to  a  grin.  ‘It’s  a  long  time  since  I  saw  you  round 
here.  It’s  lucky  for  you  that  I  know  you.  I  was  just  going  out 
to  set  my  dogs  on  any  strangers.  There  are  some  funny  things 
going  on  today.  Of  course,  we  do  get  queer  folk  wandering 
in  these  parts  at  times.  Too  near  the  River,’  he  said,  shaking 
his  head.  ‘But  this  fellow  was  the  most  outlandish  I  have  ever 
set  eyes  on.  He  won’t  cross  my  land  without  leave  a  second 
time,  not  if  I  can  stop  it.’ 

‘What  fellow  do  you  mean?’  asked  Pippin. 

‘Then  you  haven’t  seen  him?’  said  the  farmer.  ‘He  went 
up  the  lane  towards  the  causeway  not  a  long  while  back.  He 
was  a  funny  customer  and  asking  funny  questions.  But  per¬ 
haps  you’ll  come  along  inside,  and  we’ll  pass  the  news  more 
comfortable.  I’ve  a  drop  of  good  ale  on  tap,  if  you  and  your 
friends  are  willing,  Mr.  Took.’ 

It  seemed  plain  that  the  farmer  would  tell  them  more,  if 
allowed  to  do  it  in  his  own  time  and  fashion,  so  they  all 
accepted  the  invitation.  ‘What  about  the  dogs?’  asked  Frodo 
anxiously. 

The  farmer  laughed.  ‘They  won’t  harm  you  -  not  unless  I 
tell  ’em  to.  Here,  Grip!  Fang!  Heel!’  he  cried.  ‘Heel,  Wolf!’ 
To  the  relief  of  Frodo  and  Sam,  the  dogs  walked  away  and 
let  them  go  free. 

Pippin  introduced  the  other  two  to  the  farmer.  ‘Mr.  Frodo 
Baggins,’  he  said.  ‘You  may  not  remember  him,  but  he  used 
to  live  at  Brandy  Hall.’  At  the  name  Baggins  the  farmer 
started,  and  gave  Frodo  a  sharp  glance.  For  a  moment  Frodo 
thought  that  the  memory  of  stolen  mushrooms  had  been 
aroused,  and  that  the  dogs  would  be  told  to  see  him  off.  But 
Farmer  Maggot  took  him  by  the  arm. 

Well,  if  that  isn’t  queerer  than  ever!’  he  exclaimed.  ‘Mr. 
Baggins  is  it?  Come  inside!  We  must  have  a  talk.’ 

They  went  into  the  farmer’s  kitchen,  and  sat  by  the  wide 
fire-place.  Mrs.  Maggot  brought  out  beer  in  a  huge  jug,  and 
filled  four  large  mugs.  It  was  a  good  brew,  and  Pippin  found 
himself  more  than  compensated  for  missing  the  Golden  Perch. 
Sam  sipped  his  beer  suspiciously.  He  had  a  natural  mistrust 


122 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


of  the  inhabitants  of  other  parts  of  the  Shire;  and  also  he  was 
not  disposed  to  be  quick  friends  with  anyone  who  had  beaten 
his  master,  however  long  ago. 

After  a  few  remarks  about  the  weather  and  the  agricultural 
prospects  (which  were  no  worse  than  usual),  Farmer  Maggot 
put  down  his  mug  and  looked  at  them  all  in  turn. 

‘Now,  Mr.  Peregrin,’  he  said,  ‘where  might  you  be  coming 
from,  and  where  might  you  be  going  to?  Were  you  coming 
to  visit  me?  For,  if  so,  you  had  gone  past  my  gate  without 
my  seeing  you.’ 

‘Well,  no,’  answered  Pippin.  ‘To  tell  you  the  truth,  since 
you  have  guessed  it,  we  got  into  the  lane  from  the  other  end: 
we  had  come  over  your  fields.  But  that  was  quite  by  accident. 
We  lost  our  way  in  the  woods,  back  near  Woodhall,  trying  to 
take  a  short  cut  to  the  Ferry.’ 

‘If  you  were  in  a  hurry,  the  road  would  have  served  you 
better,’  said  the  farmer.  ‘But  I  wasn’t  worrying  about  that. 
You  have  leave  to  walk  over  my  land,  if  you  have  a  mind, 
Mr.  Peregrin.  And  you,  Mr.  Baggins  -  though  I  daresay  you 
still  like  mushrooms.’  He  laughed.  ‘Ah  yes,  I  recognized  the 
name.  I  recollect  the  time  when  young  Frodo  Baggins  was 
one  of  the  worst  young  rascals  of  Buckland.  But  it  wasn’t 
mushrooms  I  was  thinking  of.  I  had  just  heard  the  name 
Baggins  before  you  turned  up.  What  do  you  think  that  funny 
customer  asked  me?’ 

They  waited  anxiously  for  him  to  go  on.  ‘Well,’  the  farmer 
continued,  approaching  his  point  with  slow  relish,  ‘he  came 
riding  on  a  big  black  horse  in  at  the  gate,  which  happened  to 
be  open,  and  right  up  to  my  door.  All  black  he  was  himself, 
too,  and  cloaked  and  hooded  up,  as  if  he  did  not  want  to  be 
known.  “Now  what  in  the  Shire  can  he  want?”  I  thought  to 
myself.  We  don’t  see  many  of  the  Big  Folic  over  the  border; 
and  anyway  I  had  never  heard  of  any  like  this  black  fellow. 

‘  “Good-day  to  you!”  I  says,  going  out  to  him.  “This  lane 
don’t  lead  anywhere,  and  wherever  you  may  be  going,  your 
quickest  way  will  be  back  to  the  road.”  I  didn’t  like  the  looks 
of  him;  and  when  Grip  came  out,  he  took  one  sniff  and  let 


A  SHORT  CUT  TO  MUSHROOMS  123 

out  a  yelp  as  if  he  had  been  stung:  he  put  down  his  tail  and 
bolted  off  howling.  The  black  fellow  sat  quite  still. 

‘  “I  come  from  yonder,”  he  said,  slow  and  stiff-like, 
pointing  back  west,  over  my  fields,  if  you  please.  “Have  you 
seen  Baggins ?”  he  asked  in  a  queer  voice,  and  bent  down 
towards  me.  I  could  not  see  any  face,  for  his  hood  fell  down 
so  low;  and  I  felt  a  sort  of  shiver  down  my  back.  But  I  did 
not  see  why  he  should  come  riding  over  my  land  so  bold. 

‘  “Be  off!”  I  said.  “There  are  no  Bagginses  here.  You’re  in 
the  wrong  part  of  the  Shire.  You  had  better  go  back  west  to 
Hobbiton  -  but  you  can  go  by  road  this  time.” 

‘  “Baggins  has  left,”  he  answered  in  a  whisper.  “He  is 
coming.  He  is  not  far  away.  I  wish  to  find  him.  If  he  passes 
will  you  tell  me?  I  will  come  back  with  gold.” 

‘“No  you  won’t,”  I  said.  “You’ll  go  back  where  you 
belong,  double  quick.  I  give  you  one  minute  before  I  call  all 
my  dogs.” 

‘He  gave  a  sort  of  hiss.  It  might  have  been  laughing,  and 
it  might  not.  Then  he  spurred  his  great  horse  right  at  me, 
and  I  jumped  out  of  the  way  only  just  in  time.  I  called  the 
dogs,  but  he  swung  off,  and  rode  through  the  gate  and  up 
the  lane  towards  the  causeway  like  a  bolt  of  thunder.  What 
do  you  think  of  that?’ 

Frodo  sat  for  a  moment  looking  at  the  fire,  but  his  only 
thought  was  how  on  earth  would  they  reach  the  Ferry.  ‘I 
don’t  know  what  to  think,’  he  said  at  last. 

‘Then  I’ll  tell  you  what  to  think,’  said  Maggot.  ‘You  should 
never  have  gone  mixing  yourself  up  with  Hobbiton  folk,  Mr. 
Frodo.  Folk  are  queer  up  there.’  Sam  stirred  in  his  chair,  and 
looked  at  the  farmer  with  an  unfriendly  eye.  ‘But  you  were 
always  a  reckless  lad.  When  I  heard  you  had  left  the  Brandy- 
bucks  and  gone  off  to  that  old  Mr.  Bilbo,  I  said  that  you  were 
going  to  find  trouble.  Mark  my  words,  this  all  comes  of  those 
strange  doings  of  Mr.  Bilbo’s.  His  money  was  got  in  some 
strange  fashion  in  foreign  parts,  they  say.  Maybe  there  is 
some  that  want  to  know  what  has  become  of  the  gold  and 
jewels  that  he  buried  in  the  hill  of  Hobbiton,  as  I  hear?’ 


124 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Frodo  said  nothing:  the  shrewd  guesses  of  the  farmer  were 
rather  disconcerting. 

‘Well,  Mr.  Frodo,’  Maggot  went  on,  ‘I’m  glad  that  you’ve 
had  the  sense  to  come  back  to  Buckland.  My  advice  is:  stay 
there!  And  don’t  get  mixed  up  with  these  outlandish  folk. 
You’ll  have  friends  in  these  parts.  If  any  of  these  black  fellows 
come  after  you  again,  I’ll  deal  with  them.  I’ll  say  you’re  dead, 
or  have  left  the  Shire,  or  anything  you  like.  And  that  might 
be  true  enough;  for  as  like  as  not  it  is  old  Mr.  Bilbo  they  want 
news  of.’ 

‘Maybe  you’re  right,’  said  Frodo,  avoiding  the  farmer’s  eye 
and  staring  at  the  fire. 

Maggot  looked  at  him  thoughtfully.  ‘Well,  I  see  you  have 
ideas  of  your  own,’  he  said.  ‘It  is  as  plain  as  my  nose  that  no 
accident  brought  you  and  that  rider  here  on  the  same  after¬ 
noon;  and  maybe  my  news  was  no  great  news  to  you,  after 
all.  I  am  not  asking  you  to  tell  me  anything  you  have  a  mind 
to  keep  to  yourself;  but  I  see  you  are  in  some  kind  of  trouble. 
Perhaps  you  are  thinking  it  won’t  be  too  easy  to  get  to  the 
Ferry  without  being  caught?’ 

‘I  was  thinking  so,’  said  Frodo.  ‘But  we  have  got  to  try  and 
get  there;  and  it  won’t  be  done  by  sitting  and  thinking.  So  I 
am  afraid  we  must  be  going.  Thank  you  very  much  indeed 
for  your  kindness!  I’ve  been  in  terror  of  you  and  your  dogs 
for  over  thirty  years,  Farmer  Maggot,  though  you  may  laugh 
to  hear  it.  It’s  a  pity:  for  I’ve  missed  a  good  friend.  And  now 
I’m  sorry  to  leave  so  soon.  But  I’ll  come  back,  perhaps,  one 
day  -  if  I  get  a  chance.’ 

‘You’ll  be  welcome  when  you  come,’  said  Maggot.  ‘But 
now  I’ve  a  notion.  It’s  near  sundown  already,  and  we  are 
going  to  have  our  supper;  for  we  mostly  go  to  bed  soon  after 
the  Sun.  If  you  and  Mr.  Peregrin  and  all  could  stay  and  have 
a  bite  with  us,  we  would  be  pleased!’ 

‘And  so  should  we!’  said  Frodo.  ‘But  we  must  be  going  at 
once,  I’m  afraid.  Even  now  it  will  be  dark  before  we  can 
reach  the  Ferry.’ 

‘Ah!  but  wait  a  minute!  I  was  going  to  say:  after  a  bit  of 


A  SHORT  CUT  TO  MUSHROOMS 


125 


supper,  I’ll  get  out  a  small  waggon,  and  I’ll  drive  you  all  to 
the  Ferry.  That  will  save  you  a  good  step,  and  it  might  also 
save  you  trouble  of  another  sort.’ 

Frodo  now  accepted  the  invitation  gratefully,  to  the  relief 
of  Pippin  and  Sam.  The  sun  was  already  behind  the  western 
hills,  and  the  light  was  failing.  Two  of  Maggot’s  sons  and  his 
three  daughters  came  in,  and  a  generous  supper  was  laid  on 
the  large  table.  The  kitchen  was  lit  with  candles  and  the  fire 
was  mended.  Mrs.  Maggot  bustled  in  and  out.  One  or  two 
other  hobbits  belonging  to  the  farm-household  came  in.  In  a 
short  while  fourteen  sat  down  to  eat.  There  was  beer  in 
plenty,  and  a  mighty  dish  of  mushrooms  and  bacon,  besides 
much  other  solid  farmhouse  fare.  The  dogs  lay  by  the  fire 
and  gnawed  rinds  and  cracked  bones. 

When  they  had  finished,  the  farmer  and  his  sons  went  out 
with  a  lantern  and  got  the  waggon  ready.  It  was  dark  in  the 
yard,  when  the  guests  came  out.  They  threw  their  packs  on 
board  and  climbed  in.  The  farmer  sat  in  the  driving-seat,  and 
whipped  up  his  two  stout  ponies.  His  wife  stood  in  the  light 
of  the  open  door. 

‘You  be  careful  of  yourself,  Maggot!’  she  called.  ‘Don’t  go 
arguing  with  any  foreigners,  and  come  straight  back!’ 

‘I  will!’  said  he,  and  drove  out  of  the  gate.  There  was  now 
no  breath  of  wind  stirring;  the  night  was  still  and  quiet,  and 
a  chill  was  in  the  air.  They  went  without  lights  and  took  it 
slowly.  After  a  mile  or  two  the  lane  came  to  an  end,  crossing 
a  deep  dike,  and  climbing  a  short  slope  up  on  to  the  high- 
banked  causeway. 

Maggot  got  down  and  took  a  good  look  either  way,  north 
and  south,  but  nothing  could  be  seen  in  the  darkness,  and 
there  was  not  a  sound  in  the  still  air.  Thin  strands  of  river-mist 
were  hanging  above  the  dikes,  and  crawling  over  the  fields. 

‘It’s  going  to  be  thick,’  said  Maggot;  ‘but  I’ll  not  light  my 
lanterns  till  I  turn  for  home.  We’ll  hear  anything  on  the  road 
long  before  we  meet  it  tonight.’ 


126 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


It  was  five  miles  or  more  from  Maggot’s  lane  to  the  Ferry. 
The  hobbits  wrapped  themselves  up,  but  their  ears  were 
strained  for  any  sound  above  the  creak  of  the  wheels  and  the 
slow  clop  of  the  ponies’  hoofs.  The  waggon  seemed  slower 
than  a  snail  to  Frodo.  Beside  him  Pippin  was  nodding 
towards  sleep;  but  Sam  was  staring  forwards  into  the  rising 
fog. 

They  reached  the  entrance  to  the  Ferry  lane  at  last.  It  was 
marked  by  two  tall  white  posts  that  suddenly  loomed  up  on 
their  right.  Farmer  Maggot  drew  in  his  ponies  and  the  waggon 
creaked  to  a  halt.  They  were  just  beginning  to  scramble  out, 
when  suddenly  they  heard  what  they  had  all  been  dreading: 
hoofs  on  the  road  ahead.  The  sound  was  coming  towards 
them. 

Maggot  jumped  down  and  stood  holding  the  ponies’  heads, 
and  peering  forward  into  the  gloom.  Clip-clop ,  clip-clop  came 
the  approaching  rider.  The  fall  of  the  hoofs  sounded  loud  in 
the  still,  foggy  air. 

‘You’d  better  be  hidden,  Mr.  Frodo,’  said  Sam  anxiously. 
‘You  get  down  in  the  waggon  and  cover  up  with  blankets, 
and  we’ll  send  this  rider  to  the  rightabouts!’  He  climbed  out 
and  went  to  the  farmer’s  side.  Black  Riders  would  have  to 
ride  over  him  to  get  near  the  waggon. 

Clop-clop,  clop-clop.  The  rider  was  nearly  on  them. 

‘Hallo  there!’  called  Farmer  Maggot.  The  advancing  hoofs 
stopped  short.  They  thought  they  could  dimly  guess  a  dark 
cloaked  shape  in  the  mist,  a  yard  or  two  ahead. 

‘Now  then!’  said  the  farmer,  throwing  the  reins  to  Sam  and 
striding  forward.  ‘Don’t  you  come  a  step  nearer!  What  do 
you  want,  and  where  are  you  going?’ 

‘I  want  Mr.  Baggins.  Have  you  seen  him?’  said  a  muffled 
voice  -  but  the  voice  was  the  voice  of  Merry  Brandybuck.  A 
dark  lantern  was  uncovered,  and  its  light  fell  on  the  astonished 
face  of  the  farmer. 

‘Mr.  Merry!’  he  cried. 

‘Yes,  of  course!  Who  did  you  think  it  was?’  said  Merry 
coming  forward.  As  he  came  out  of  the  mist  and  their  fears 


A  SHORT  CUT  TO  MUSHROOMS 


127 


subsided,  he  seemed  suddenly  to  diminish  to  ordinary  hobbit- 
size.  He  was  riding  a  pony,  and  a  scarf  was  swathed  round 
his  neck  and  over  his  chin  to  keep  out  the  fog. 

Frodo  sprang  out  of  the  waggon  to  greet  him.  ‘So  there 
you  are  at  last!’  said  Merry.  ‘I  was  beginning  to  wonder  if 
you  would  turn  up  at  all  today,  and  I  was  just  going  back  to 
supper.  When  it  grew  foggy  I  came  across  and  rode  up 
towards  Stock  to  see  if  you  had  fallen  in  any  ditches.  But  I’m 
blest  if  I  know  which  way  you  have  come.  Where  did  you 
find  them,  Mr.  Maggot?  In  your  duck-pond?’ 

‘No,  I  caught  ’em  trespassing,’  said  the  farmer,  ‘and  nearly 
set  my  dogs  on  ’em;  but  they’ll  tell  you  all  the  story,  I’ve  no 
doubt.  Now,  if  you’ll  excuse  me,  Mr.  Merry  and  Mr.  Frodo 
and  all,  I’d  best  be  turning  for  home.  Mrs.  Maggot  will  be 
worriting  with  the  night  getting  thick.’ 

He  backed  the  waggon  into  the  lane  and  turned  it.  ‘Well, 
good  night  to  you  all,’  he  said.  ‘It’s  been  a  queer  day,  and  no 
mistake.  But  all’s  well  as  ends  well;  though  perhaps  we  should 
not  say  that  until  we  reach  our  own  doors.  I’ll  not  deny  that 
I’ll  be  glad  now  when  I  do.’  He  lit  his  lanterns,  and  got  up. 
Suddenly  he  produced  a  large  basket  from  under  the  seat.  ‘I 
was  nearly  forgetting,’  he  said.  ‘Mrs.  Maggot  put  this  up  for 
Mr.  Baggins,  with  her  compliments.’  He  handed  it  down  and 
moved  off,  followed  by  a  chorus  of  thanks  and  good-nights. 

They  watched  the  pale  rings  of  light  round  his  lanterns  as 
they  dwindled  into  the  foggy  night.  Suddenly  Frodo  laughed: 
from  the  covered  basket  he  held,  the  scent  of  mushrooms 
was  rising. 


Chapter  5 


A  CONSPIRACY  UNMASKED 


‘Now  we  had  better  get  home  ourselves,’  said  Merry.  ‘There’s 
something  funny  about  all  this,  I  see;  but  it  must  wait  till  we 
get  in.’ 

They  turned  down  the  Ferry  lane,  which  was  straight  and 
well-kept  and  edged  with  large  white-washed  stones.  In  a 
hundred  yards  or  so  it  brought  them  to  the  river-bank,  where 
there  was  a  broad  wooden  landing-stage.  A  large  flat  ferry¬ 
boat  was  moored  beside  it.  The  white  bollards  near  the 
water’s  edge  glimmered  in  the  light  of  two  lamps  on  high 
posts.  Behind  them  the  mists  in  the  flat  fields  were  now  above 
the  hedges;  but  the  water  before  them  was  dark,  with  only  a 
few  curling  wisps  like  steam  among  the  reeds  by  the  hank. 
There  seemed  to  be  less  fog  on  the  further  side. 

Merry  led  the  pony  over  a  gangway  on  to  the  ferry,  and 
the  others  followed.  Merry  then  pushed  slowly  off  with  a  long 
pole.  The  Brandywine  flowed  slow  and  broad  before  them. 
On  the  other  side  the  bank  was  steep,  and  up  it  a  winding 
path  climbed  from  the  further  landing.  Lamps  were  twinkling 
there.  Behind  loomed  up  the  Buck  Hill;  and  out  of  it,  through 
stray  shrouds  of  mist,  shone  many  round  windows,  yellow 
and  red.  They  were  the  windows  of  Brandy  Hall,  the  ancient 
home  of  the  Brandybucks. 

Long  ago  Gorhendad  Oldbuck,  head  of  the  Oldbuck 
family,  one  of  the  oldest  in  the  Marish  or  indeed  in  the  Shire, 
had  crossed  the  river,  which  was  the  original  boundary  of 
the  land  eastwards.  He  built  (and  excavated)  Brandy  Hall, 
changed  his  name  to  Brandybuck,  and  settled  down  to 
become  master  of  what  was  virtually  a  small  independent 
country.  His  family  grew  and  grew,  and  after  his  days  con- 


A  CONSPIRACY  UNMASKED 


129 


tinued  to  grow,  until  Brandy  Hall  occupied  the  whole  of  the 
low  hill,  and  had  three  large  front-doors,  many  side-doors, 
and  about  a  hundred  windows.  The  Brandybucks  and  their 
numerous  dependants  then  began  to  burrow,  and  later  to 
build,  all  round  about.  That  was  the  origin  of  Buckland,  a 
thickly  inhabited  strip  between  the  river  and  the  Old  Forest,  a 
sort  of  colony  from  the  Shire.  Its  chief  village  was  Bucklebury, 
clustering  in  the  banks  and  slopes  behind  Brandy  Hall. 

The  people  in  the  Marish  were  friendly  with  the  Buck- 
landers,  and  the  authority  of  the  Master  of  the  Hall  (as  the 
head  of  the  Brandybuck  family  was  called)  was  still  acknowl¬ 
edged  by  the  farmers  between  Stock  and  Rushey.  But  most 
of  the  folk  of  the  old  Shire  regarded  the  Bucklanders  as 
peculiar,  half  foreigners  as  it  were.  Though,  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  they  were  not  very  different  from  the  other  hobbits 
of  the  Four  Farthings.  Except  in  one  point:  they  were  fond 
of  boats,  and  some  of  them  could  swim. 

Their  land  was  originally  unprotected  from  the  East;  but 
on  that  side  they  had  built  a  hedge:  the  High  Hay.  It  had 
been  planted  many  generations  ago,  and  was  now  thick  and 
tall,  for  it  was  constantly  tended.  It  ran  all  the  way  from 
Brandywine  Bridge,  in  a  big  loop  curving  away  from  the 
river,  to  Haysend  (where  the  Withywindle  flowed  out  of  the 
Forest  into  the  Brandywine) :  well  over  twenty  miles  from  end 
to  end.  But,  of  course,  it  was  not  a  complete  protection. 
The  Forest  drew  close  to  the  hedge  in  many  places.  The 
Bucklanders  kept  their  doors  locked  after  dark,  and  that  also 
was  not  usual  in  the  Shire. 

The  ferry-boat  moved  slowly  across  the  water.  The  Buck- 
land  shore  drew  nearer.  Sam  was  the  only  member  of  the 
party  who  had  not  been  over  the  river  before.  He  had  a 
strange  feeling  as  the  slow  gurgling  stream  slipped  by:  his  old 
life  lay  behind  in  the  mists,  dark  adventure  lay  in  front.  He 
scratched  his  head,  and  for  a  moment  had  a  passing  wish  that 
Mr.  Frodo  could  have  gone  on  living  quietly  at  Bag  End. 

The  four  hobbits  stepped  off  the  ferry.  Merry  was  tying  it 


130  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

up,  and  Pippin  was  already  leading  the  pony  up  the  path, 
when  Sam  (who  had  been  looking  back,  as  if  to  take  farewell 
of  the  Shire)  said  in  a  hoarse  whisper: 

‘Look  back,  Mr.  Frodo!  Do  you  see  anything?’ 

On  the  far  stage,  under  the  distant  lamps,  they  could  just 
make  out  a  figure:  it  looked  like  a  dark  black  bundle  left 
behind.  But  as  they  looked  it  seemed  to  move  and  sway  this 
way  and  that,  as  if  searching  the  ground.  It  then  crawled,  or 
went  crouching,  back  into  the  gloom  beyond  the  lamps. 

‘What  in  the  Shire  is  that?’  exclaimed  Merry. 

‘Something  that  is  following  us,’  said  Frodo.  ‘But  don’t  ask 
any  more  now!  Let’s  get  away  at  once!’  They  hurried  up  the 
path  to  the  top  of  the  bank,  but  when  they  looked  back  the 
far  shore  was  shrouded  in  mist,  and  nothing  could  be  seen. 

‘Thank  goodness  you  don’t  keep  any  boats  on  the  west- 
bank!’  said  Frodo.  ‘Can  horses  cross  the  river?’ 

‘They  can  go  ten  miles  north  to  Brandywine  Bridge  -  or 
they  might  swim,’  answered  Merry.  ‘Though  I  never  heard 
of  any  horse  swimming  the  Brandywine.  But  what  have 
horses  to  do  with  it?’ 

‘I’ll  tell  you  later.  Let’s  get  indoors  and  then  we  can  talk.’ 

‘All  right!  You  and  Pippin  know  your  way;  so  I’ll  just  ride 
on  and  tell  Fatty  Bolger  that  you  are  coming.  We’ll  see  about 
supper  and  things.’ 

We  had  our  supper  early  with  Farmer  Maggot,’  said 
Frodo;  ‘but  we  could  do  with  another.’ 

‘You  shall  have  it!  Give  me  that  basket!’  said  Merry,  and 
rode  ahead  into  the  darkness. 

It  was  some  distance  from  the  Brandywine  to  Frodo’s  new 
house  at  Crickhollow.  They  passed  Buck  Hill  and  Brandy 
Hall  on  their  left,  and  on  the  outskirts  of  Bucklebury  struck 
the  main  road  of  Buckland  that  ran  south  from  the  Bridge. 
Half  a  mile  northward  along  this  they  came  to  a  lane  opening 
on  their  right.  This  they  followed  for  a  couple  of  miles  as  it 
climbed  up  and  down  into  the  country. 

At  last  they  came  to  a  narrow  gate  in  a  thick  hedge.  Nothing 


A  CONSPIRACY  UNMASKED  131 

could  be  seen  of  the  house  in  the  dark:  it  stood  back  from 
the  lane  in  the  middle  of  a  wide  circle  of  lawn  surrounded  by 
a  belt  of  low  trees  inside  the  outer  hedge.  Frodo  had  chosen 
it,  because  it  stood  in  an  out-of-the-way  corner  of  the 
country,  and  there  were  no  other  dwellings  close  by.  You 
could  get  in  and  out  without  being  noticed.  It  had  been  built 
a  long  while  before  by  the  Brandybucks,  for  the  use  of  guests, 
or  members  of  the  family  that  wished  to  escape  from  the 
crowded  life  of  Brandy  Hall  for  a  time.  It  was  an  old- 
fashioned  countrified  house,  as  much  like  a  hobbit-hole  as 
possible:  it  was  long  and  low,  with  no  upper  storey;  and  it 
had  a  roof  of  turf,  round  windows,  and  a  large  round  door. 

As  they  walked  up  the  green  path  from  the  gate  no  light 
was  visible;  the  windows  were  dark  and  shuttered.  Frodo 
knocked  on  the  door,  and  Fatty  Bolger  opened  it.  A  friendly 
light  streamed  out.  They  slipped  in  quickly  and  shut  them¬ 
selves  and  the  light  inside.  They  were  in  a  wide  hall  with 
doors  on  either  side;  in  front  of  them  a  passage  ran  back 
down  the  middle  of  the  house. 

‘Well,  what  do  you  think  of  it?’  asked  Merry  coming  up 
the  passage.  We  have  done  our  best  in  a  short  time  to  make 
it  look  like  home.  After  all  Fatty  and  I  only  got  here  with  the 
last  cart-load  yesterday.’ 

Frodo  looked  round.  It  did  look  like  home.  Many  of  his 
own  favourite  things  -  or  Bilbo’s  things  (they  reminded  him 
sharply  of  him  in  their  new  setting)  -  were  arranged  as  nearly 
as  possible  as  they  had  been  at  Bag  End.  It  was  a  pleasant, 
comfortable,  welcoming  place;  and  he  found  himself  wishing 
that  he  was  really  coming  here  to  settle  down  in  quiet  retire¬ 
ment.  It  seemed  unfair  to  have  put  his  friends  to  all  this 
trouble;  and  he  wondered  again  how  he  was  going  to  break 
the  news  to  them  that  he  must  leave  them  so  soon,  indeed  at 
once.  Yet  that  would  have  to  be  done  that  very  night,  before 
they  all  went  to  bed. 

‘It’s  delightful!’  he  said  with  an  effort.  ‘I  hardly  feel  that  I 
have  moved  at  all.’ 


132 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


The  travellers  hung  up  their  cloaks,  and  piled  their  packs  on 
the  floor.  Merry  led  them  down  the  passage  and  threw  open  a 
door  at  the  far  end.  Firelight  came  out,  and  a  puff  of  steam. 

‘A  bath!’  cried  Pippin.  ‘O  blessed  Meriadoc!’ 

‘Which  order  shall  we  go  in?’  said  Frodo.  ‘Eldest  first,  or 
quickest  first?  You’ll  be  last  either  way,  Master  Peregrin.’ 

‘Trust  me  to  arrange  things  better  than  that!’  said  Merry. 
‘We  can’t  begin  life  at  Crickhollow  with  a  quarrel  over  baths. 
In  that  room  there  are  three  tubs,  and  a  copper  full  of  boiling 
water.  There  are  also  towels,  mats  and  soap.  Get  inside,  and 
be  quick!’ 

Merry  and  Fatty  went  into  the  kitchen  on  the  other  side  of 
the  passage,  and  busied  themselves  with  the  final  preparations 
for  a  late  supper.  Snatches  of  competing  songs  came  from 
the  bathroom  mixed  with  the  sound  of  splashing  and  wallow¬ 
ing.  The  voice  of  Pippin  was  suddenly  lifted  up  above  the 
others  in  one  of  Bilbo’s  favourite  bath-songs. 

Sing  hey!  for  the  bath  at  close  of  day 
that  washes  the  weary  mud  away! 

A  loon  is  he  that  will  not  sing: 

O!  Water  Hot  is  a  noble  thing! 

O!  Sweet  is  the  sound  of  falling  rain, 
and  the  brook  that  leaps  from  hill  to  plain; 
but  better  than  rain  or  rippling  streams 
is  Water  Hot  that  smokes  and  steams. 

O!  Water  cold  we  may  pour  at  need 
down  a  thirsty  throat  and  be  glad  indeed; 
but  better  is  Beer,  if  drink  we  lack, 
and  Water  Hot  poured  down  the  back. 

O!  Water  is  fair  that  leaps  on  high 
in  a  fountain  white  beneath  the  sky; 
but  never  did  fountain  sound  so  sweet 
as  splashing  Hot  Water  with  my  feet! 


A  CONSPIRACY  UNMASKED 


133 


There  was  a  terrific  splash,  and  a  shout  of  Whoa!  from 
Frodo.  It  appeared  that  a  lot  of  Pippin’s  bath  had  imitated  a 
fountain  and  leaped  on  high. 

Merry  went  to  the  door:  ‘What  about  supper  and  beer  in 
the  throat?’  he  called.  Frodo  came  out  drying  his  hair. 

‘There’s  so  much  water  in  the  air  that  I’m  coming  into  the 
kitchen  to  finish,’  he  said. 

‘Lawks!’  said  Merry,  looking  in.  The  stone  floor  was  swim¬ 
ming.  ‘You  ought  to  mop  all  that  up  before  you  get  anything 
to  eat,  Peregrin,’  he  said.  ‘Hurry  up,  or  we  shan’t  wait  for  you.’ 

They  had  supper  in  the  kitchen  on  a  table  near  the  fire. 
‘I  suppose  you  three  won’t  want  mushrooms  again?’  said 
Fredegar  without  much  hope. 

‘Yes  we  shall!’  cried  Pippin. 

‘They’re  mine!’  said  Frodo.  ‘Given  to  me  by  Mrs.  Maggot, 
a  queen  among  farmers’  wives.  Take  your  greedy  hands 
away,  and  I’ll  serve  them.’ 

Hobbits  have  a  passion  for  mushrooms,  surpassing  even 
the  greediest  likings  of  Big  People.  A  fact  which  partly 
explains  young  Frodo’s  long  expeditions  to  the  renowned 
fields  of  the  Marish,  and  the  wrath  of  the  injured  Maggot. 
On  this  occasion  there  was  plenty  for  all,  even  according  to 
hobbit  standards.  There  were  also  many  other  things  to  fol¬ 
low,  and  when  they  had  finished  even  Fatty  Bolger  heaved  a 
sigh  of  content.  They  pushed  back  the  table,  and  drew  chairs 
round  the  fire. 

‘We’ll  clear  up  later,’  said  Merry.  ‘Now  tell  me  all  about  it! 
I  guess  that  you  have  been  having  adventures,  which  was  not 
quite  fair  without  me.  I  want  a  full  account;  and  most  of  all 
I  want  to  know  what  was  the  matter  with  old  Maggot,  and 
why  he  spoke  to  me  like  that.  He  sounded  almost  as  if  he  was 
scared ,  if  that  is  possible.’ 

We  have  all  been  scared,’  said  Pippin  after  a  pause,  in 
which  Frodo  stared  at  the  fire  and  did  not  speak.  ‘You  would 
have  been,  too,  if  you  had  been  chased  for  two  days  by  Black 
Riders.’ 


134 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘And  what  are  they?’ 

‘Black  figures  riding  on  black  horses,’  answered  Pippin.  ‘If 
Frodo  won’t  talk,  I  will  tell  you  the  whole  tale  from  the 
beginning.’  He  then  gave  a  full  account  of  their  journey  from 
the  time  when  they  left  Hobbiton.  Sam  gave  various  support¬ 
ing  nods  and  exclamations.  Frodo  remained  silent. 

‘I  should  think  you  were  malting  it  all  up,’  said  Merry,  ‘if 
I  had  not  seen  that  black  shape  on  the  landing-stage  -  and 
heard  the  queer  sound  in  Maggot’s  voice.  What  do  you  make 
of  it  all,  Frodo?’ 

‘Cousin  Frodo  has  been  very  close,’  said  Pippin.  ‘But  the 
time  has  come  for  him  to  open  out.  So  far  we  have  been 
given  nothing  more  to  go  on  than  Farmer  Maggot’s  guess 
that  it  has  something  to  do  with  old  Bilbo’s  treasure.’ 

‘That  was  only  a  guess,’  said  Frodo  hastily.  ‘Maggot  does 
not  know  anything.’ 

‘Old  Maggot  is  a  shrewd  fellow,’  said  Merry.  ‘A  lot  goes 
on  behind  his  round  face  that  does  not  come  out  in  his  talk. 
I’ve  heard  that  he  used  to  go  into  the  Old  Forest  at  one  time, 
and  he  has  the  reputation  of  knowing  a  good  many  strange 
things.  But  you  can  at  least  tell  us,  Frodo,  whether  you  think 
his  guess  good  or  bad.’ 

‘I  think,’’  answered  Frodo  slowly,  ‘that  it  was  a  good  guess, 
as  far  as  it  goes.  There  is  a  connexion  with  Bilbo’s  old  adven¬ 
tures,  and  the  Riders  are  looking,  or  perhaps  one  ought  to 
say  searching,  for  him  or  for  me.  I  also  fear,  if  you  want  to 
know,  that  it  is  no  joke  at  all;  and  that  I  am  not  safe  here  or 
anywhere  else.’  He  looked  round  at  the  windows  and  walls, 
as  if  he  was  afraid  they  would  suddenly  give  way.  The  others 
looked  at  him  in  silence,  and  exchanged  meaning  glances 
among  themselves. 

‘It’s  coming  out  in  a  minute,’  whispered  Pippin  to  Merry. 
Merry  nodded. 

‘Well!’  said  Frodo  at  last,  sitting  up  and  straightening  his 
back,  as  if  he  had  made  a  decision.  ‘I  can’t  keep  it  dark  any 
longer.  I  have  got  something  to  tell  you  all.  But  I  don’t  know 
quite  how  to  begin.’ 


A  CONSPIRACY  UNMASKED  135 

‘I  think  I  could  help  you,’  said  Merry  quietly,  ‘by  telling 
you  some  of  it  myself.’ 

‘What  do  you  mean?’  said  Frodo,  looking  at  him  anxiously. 

‘Just  this,  my  dear  old  Frodo:  you  are  miserable,  because 
you  don’t  know  how  to  say  good-bye.  You  meant  to  leave  the 
Shire,  of  course.  But  danger  has  come  on  you  sooner  than  you 
expected,  and  now  you  are  making  up  your  mind  to  go  at  once. 
And  you  don’t  want  to.  We  are  very  sorry  for  you.’ 

Frodo  opened  his  mouth  and  shut  it  again.  His  look  of 
surprise  was  so  comical  that  they  laughed.  ‘Dear  old  Frodo!’ 
said  Pippin.  ‘Did  you  really  think  you  had  thrown  dust  in  all 
our  eyes?  You  have  not  been  nearly  careful  or  clever  enough 
for  that!  You  have  obviously  been  planning  to  go  and  saying 
farewell  to  all  your  haunts  all  this  year  since  April.  We  have 
constantly  heard  you  muttering:  “Shall  I  ever  look  down 
into  that  valley  again,  I  wonder”,  and  things  like  that.  And 
pretending  that  you  had  come  to  the  end  of  your  money,  and 
actually  selling  your  beloved  Bag  End  to  those  Sackville- 
Bagginses!  And  all  those  close  talks  with  Gandalf.’ 

‘Good  heavens!’  said  Frodo.  ‘I  thought  I  had  been  both 
careful  and  clever.  I  don’t  know  what  Gandalf  would  say.  Is 
all  the  Shire  discussing  my  departure  then?’ 

‘Oh  no!’  said  Merry.  ‘Don’t  worry  about  that!  The  secret 
won’t  keep  for  long,  of  course;  but  at  present  it  is,  I  think, 
only  known  to  us  conspirators.  After  all,  you  must  remember 
that  we  know  you  well,  and  are  often  with  you.  We  can 
usually  guess  what  you  are  thinking.  I  knew  Bilbo,  too.  To 
tell  you  the  truth,  I  have  been  watching  you  rather  closely 
ever  since  he  left.  I  thought  you  would  go  after  him  sooner 
or  later;  indeed  I  expected  you  to  go  sooner,  and  lately  we 
have  been  very  anxious.  We  have  been  terrified  that  you 
might  give  us  the  slip,  and  go  off  suddenly,  all  on  your  own 
like  he  did.  Ever  since  this  spring  we  have  kept  our  eyes  open, 
and  done  a  good  deal  of  planning  on  our  own  account.  You 
are  not  going  to  escape  so  easily!’ 

‘But  I  must  go,’  said  Frodo.  ‘It  cannot  be  helped,  dear 
friends.  It  is  wretched  for  us  all,  but  it  is  no  use  your  trying 


136 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


to  keep  me.  Since  you  have  guessed  so  much,  please  help  me 
and  do  not  hinder  me!’ 

‘You  do  not  understand!’  said  Pippin.  ‘You  must  go  -  and 
therefore  we  must,  too.  Merry  and  I  are  coming  with  you. 
Sam  is  an  excellent  fellow,  and  would  jump  down  a  dragon’s 
throat  to  save  you,  if  he  did  not  trip  over  his  own  feet;  but 
you  will  need  more  than  one  companion  in  your  dangerous 
adventure.’ 

‘My  dear  and  most  beloved  hobbits!’  said  Frodo  deeply 
moved.  ‘But  I  could  not  allow  it.  I  decided  that  long  ago,  too. 
You  speak  of  danger,  but  you  do  not  understand.  This  is  no 
treasure -hunt,  no  there-and-back  journey.  I  am  flying  from 
deadly  peril  into  deadly  peril.’ 

‘Of  course  we  understand,’  said  Merry  firmly.  ‘That  is 
why  we  have  decided  to  come.  We  know  the  Ring  is  no 
laughing-matter;  but  we  are  going  to  do  our  best  to  help  you 
against  the  Enemy.’ 

‘The  Ring!’  said  Frodo,  now  completely  amazed. 

‘Yes,  the  Ring,’  said  Merry.  ‘My  dear  old  hobbit,  you  don’t 
allow  for  the  inquisitiveness  of  friends.  I  have  known  about 
the  existence  of  the  Ring  for  years  -  before  Bilbo  went  away, 
in  fact;  but  since  he  obviously  regarded  it  as  secret,  I  kept  the 
knowledge  in  my  head,  until  we  formed  our  conspiracy.  I  did 
not  know  Bilbo,  of  course,  as  well  as  I  know  you;  I  was  too 
young,  and  he  was  also  more  careful  -  but  he  was  not  care¬ 
ful  enough.  If  you  want  to  know  how  I  first  found  out,  I  will 
tell  you.’ 

‘Go  on!’  said  Frodo  faintly. 

‘It  was  the  Sackville-Bagginses  that  were  his  downfall,  as  you 
might  expect.  One  day,  a  year  before  the  Party,  I  happened  to 
be  walking  along  the  road,  when  I  saw  Bilbo  ahead.  Suddenly 
in  the  distance  the  S.-B.s  appeared,  coming  towards  us.  Bilbo 
slowed  down,  and  then  hey  presto!  he  vanished.  I  was  so 
startled  that  I  hardly  had  the  wits  to  hide  myself  in  a  more 
ordinary  fashion;  but  I  got  through  the  hedge  and  walked 
along  the  field  inside.  I  was  peeping  through  into  the  road, 
after  the  S.-B.s  had  passed,  and  was  looking  straight  at  Bilbo 


A  CONSPIRACY  UNMASKED  137 

when  he  suddenly  reappeared.  I  caught  a  glint  of  gold  as  he 
put  something  back  in  his  trouser-pocket. 

‘After  that  I  kept  my  eyes  open.  In  fact,  I  confess  that  I 
spied.  But  you  must  admit  that  it  was  very  intriguing,  and 
I  was  only  in  my  teens.  I  must  be  the  only  one  in  the  Shire, 
besides  you  Frodo,  that  has  ever  seen  the  old  fellow’s  secret 
book.’ 

‘You  have  read  his  book!’  cried  Frodo.  ‘Good  heavens 
above!  Is  nothing  safe?’ 

‘Not  too  safe,  I  should  say,’  said  Merry.  ‘But  I  have  only 
had  one  rapid  glance,  and  that  was  difficult  to  get.  He  never 
left  the  book  about.  I  wonder  what  became  of  it.  I  should  like 
another  look.  Have  you  got  it,  Frodo?’ 

‘No.  It  was  not  at  Bag  End.  He  must  have  taken  it  away.’ 

‘Well,  as  I  was  saying,’  Merry  proceeded,  ‘I  kept  my  know¬ 
ledge  to  myself,  till  this  spring  when  things  got  serious.  Then 
we  formed  our  conspiracy;  and  as  we  were  serious,  too,  and 
meant  business,  we  have  not  been  too  scrupulous.  You  are 
not  a  very  easy  nut  to  crack,  and  Gandalf  is  worse.  But  if  you 
want  to  be  introduced  to  our  chief  investigator,  I  can  produce 
him.’ 

‘Where  is  he?’  said  Frodo,  looking  round,  as  if  he  expected 
a  masked  and  sinister  figure  to  come  out  of  a  cupboard. 

‘Step  forward,  Sam!’  said  Merry;  and  Sam  stood  up  with 
a  face  scarlet  up  to  the  ears.  ‘Here’s  our  collector  of  infor¬ 
mation!  And  he  collected  a  lot,  I  can  tell  you,  before  he  was 
finally  caught.  After  which,  I  may  say,  he  seemed  to  regard 
himself  as  on  parole,  and  dried  up.’ 

‘Sam!’  cried  Frodo,  feeling  that  amazement  could  go  no 
further,  and  quite  unable  to  decide  whether  he  felt  angry, 
amused,  relieved,  or  merely  foolish. 

‘Yes,  sir!’  said  Sam.  ‘Begging  your  pardon,  sir!  But  I  meant 
no  wrong  to  you,  Mr.  Frodo,  nor  to  Mr.  Gandalf  for  that 
matter.  He  has  some  sense,  mind  you;  and  when  you  said  go 
alone ,  he  said  no!  take  someone  as  you  can  trust! 

‘But  it  does  not  seem  that  I  can  trust  anyone,’  said  Frodo. 

Sam  looked  at  him  unhappily.  ‘It  all  depends  on  what  you 


138 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


want,’  put  in  Merry.  ‘You  can  trust  us  to  stick  to  you  through 
thick  and  thin  -  to  the  bitter  end.  And  you  can  trust  us  to 
keep  any  secret  of  yours  -  closer  than  you  keep  it  yourself. 
But  you  cannot  trust  us  to  let  you  face  trouble  alone,  and  go 
off  without  a  word.  We  are  your  friends,  Frodo.  Anyway: 
there  it  is.  We  know  most  of  what  Gandalf  has  told  you.  We 
know  a  good  deal  about  the  Ring.  We  are  horribly  afraid  - 
but  we  are  coming  with  you;  or  following  you  like  hounds.’ 

‘And  after  all,  sir,’  added  Sam,  ‘you  did  ought  to  take  the 
Elves’  advice.  Gildor  said  you  should  take  them  as  was  will¬ 
ing,  and  you  can’t  deny  it.’ 

‘I  don’t  deny  it,’  said  Frodo,  looking  at  Sam,  who  was  now 
grinning.  ‘I  don’t  deny  it,  but  I’ll  never  believe  you  are  sleep¬ 
ing  again,  whether  you  snore  or  not.  I  shall  kick  you  hard  to 
make  sure. 

‘You  are  a  set  of  deceitful  scoundrels!’  he  said,  turning  to 
the  others.  ‘But  bless  you!’  he  laughed,  getting  up  and  waving 
his  arms,  ‘I  give  in.  I  will  take  Gildor’s  advice.  If  the  danger 
were  not  so  dark,  I  should  dance  for  joy.  Even  so,  I  cannot 
help  feeling  happy;  happier  than  I  have  felt  for  a  long  time. 
I  had  dreaded  this  evening.’ 

‘Good!  That’s  settled.  Three  cheers  for  Captain  Frodo  and 
company!’  they  shouted;  and  they  danced  round  him.  Merry 
and  Pippin  began  a  song,  which  they  had  apparently  got 
ready  for  the  occasion. 

It  was  made  on  the  model  of  the  dwarf-song  that  started 
Bilbo  on  his  adventure  long  ago,  and  went  to  the  same  tune: 

Farewell  we  call  to  hearth  and  hall! 

Though  wind  may  blow  and  rain  may  fall, 

We  must  away  ere  break  of  day 
Far  over  wood  and  mountain  tall. 

To  Rivendell,  where  Elves  yet  dwell 
In  glades  beneath  the  misty  fell, 

Through  moor  and  waste  we  ride  in  haste, 

And  whither  then  we  cannot  tell. 


A  CONSPIRACY  UNMASKED 


139 


With  foes  ahead,  behind  us  dread, 

Beneath  the  sky  shall  be  our  bed, 

Until  at  last  our  toil  be  passed, 

Our  journey  done,  our  errand  sped. 

We  must  away!  We  must  away! 

We  ride  before  the  break  of  day! 

‘Very  good!’  said  Frodo.  ‘But  in  that  case  there  are  a  lot  of 
things  to  do  before  we  go  to  bed  -  under  a  roof,  for  tonight 
at  any  rate.’ 

‘Oh!  That  was  poetry!’  said  Pippin.  ‘Do  you  really  mean 
to  start  before  the  break  of  day?’ 

‘I  don’t  know,’  answered  Frodo.  ‘I  fear  those  Black  Riders, 
and  I  am  sure  it  is  unsafe  to  stay  in  one  place  long,  especially 
in  a  place  to  which  it  is  known  I  was  going.  Also  Gildor 
advised  me  not  to  wait.  But  I  should  very  much  like  to  see 
Gandalf.  I  could  see  that  even  Gildor  was  disturbed  when  he 
heard  that  Gandalf  had  never  appeared.  It  really  depends  on 
two  things.  How  soon  could  the  Riders  get  to  Bucldebury? 
And  how  soon  could  we  get  off?  It  will  take  a  good  deal  of 
preparation.’ 

‘The  answer  to  the  second  question,’  said  Merry,  ‘is  that 
we  could  get  off  in  an  hour.  I  have  prepared  practically  every¬ 
thing.  There  are  five  ponies  in  a  stable  across  the  fields;  stores 
and  tackle  are  all  packed,  except  for  a  few  extra  clothes,  and 
the  perishable  food.’ 

‘It  seems  to  have  been  a  very  efficient  conspiracy,’  said 
Frodo.  ‘But  what  about  the  Black  Riders?  Would  it  be  safe 
to  wait  one  day  for  Gandalf?’ 

‘That  all  depends  on  what  you  think  the  Riders  would  do, 
if  they  found  you  here,’  answered  Merry.  ‘They  coidd  have 
reached  here  by  now,  of  course,  if  they  were  not  stopped  at 
the  North-gate,  where  the  Hedge  runs  down  to  the  river- 
bank,  just  this  side  of  the  Bridge.  The  gate-guards  would  not 
let  them  through  by  night,  though  they  might  break  through. 
Even  in  the  daylight  they  would  try  to  keep  them  out,  I  think, 


140  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

at  any  rate  until  they  got  a  message  through  to  the  Master  of 
the  Hall  -  for  they  would  not  like  the  look  of  the  Riders, 
and  would  certainly  be  frightened  by  them.  But,  of  course, 
Buckland  cannot  resist  a  determined  attack  for  long.  And  it 
is  possible  that  in  the  morning  even  a  Black  Rider  that  rode 
up  and  asked  for  Mr.  Baggins  would  be  let  through.  It  is 
pretty  generally  known  that  you  are  coming  back  to  live  at 
Crickhollow.’ 

Frodo  sat  for  a  while  in  thought.  ‘I  have  made  up  my 
mind,’  he  said  finally.  ‘I  am  starting  tomorrow,  as  soon  as  it 
is  light.  But  I  am  not  going  by  road:  it  would  be  safer  to  wait 
here  than  that.  If  I  go  through  the  North-gate  my  departure 
from  Buckland  will  be  known  at  once,  instead  of  being  secret 
for  several  days  at  least,  as  it  might  be.  And  what  is  more, 
the  Bridge  and  the  East  Road  near  the  borders  will  certainly 
be  watched,  whether  any  Rider  gets  into  Buckland  or  not. 
We  don’t  know  how  many  there  are;  but  there  are  at  least 
two,  and  possibly  more.  The  only  thing  to  do  is  to  go  off  in 
a  quite  unexpected  direction.’ 

‘But  that  can  only  mean  going  into  the  Old  Forest!’  said 
Fredegar  horrified.  ‘You  can’t  be  thinking  of  doing  that.  It  is 
quite  as  dangerous  as  Black  Riders.’ 

‘Not  quite,’  said  Merry.  ‘It  sounds  very  desperate,  but  I 
believe  Frodo  is  right.  It  is  the  only  way  of  getting  off  without 
being  followed  at  once.  With  luck  we  might  get  a  considerable 
start.’ 

‘But  you  won’t  have  any  luck  in  the  Old  Forest,’  objected 
Fredegar.  ‘No  one  ever  has  luck  in  there.  You’ll  get  lost. 
People  don’t  go  in  there.’ 

‘Oh  yes  they  do!’  said  Merry.  ‘The  Brandybucks  go  in  - 
occasionally  when  the  fit  takes  them.  We  have  a  private 
entrance.  Frodo  went  in  once,  long  ago.  I  have  been  in  several 
times:  usually  in  daylight,  of  course,  when  the  trees  are  sleepy 
and  fairly  quiet.’ 

‘Well,  do  as  you  think  best!’  said  Fredegar.  ‘I  am  more 
afraid  of  the  Old  Forest  than  of  anything  I  know  about:  the 


A  CONSPIRACY  UNMASKED 


141 

stories  about  it  are  a  nightmare;  but  my  vote  hardly  counts, 
as  I  am  not  going  on  the  journey.  Still,  I  am  very  glad  someone 
is  stopping  behind,  who  can  tell  Gandalf  what  you  have  done, 
when  he  turns  up,  as  I  am  sure  he  will  before  long.’ 

Fond  as  he  was  of  Frodo,  Fatty  Bolger  had  no  desire  to 
leave  the  Shire,  nor  to  see  what  lay  outside  it.  His  family 
came  from  the  Eastfarthing,  from  Budgeford  in  Bridgefields 
in  fact,  but  he  had  never  been  over  the  Brandywine  Bridge. 
His  task,  according  to  the  original  plans  of  the  conspirators, 
was  to  stay  behind  and  deal  with  inquisitive  folk,  and  to  keep 
up  as  long  as  possible  the  pretence  that  Mr.  Baggins  was  still 
living  at  Crickhollow.  He  had  even  brought  along  some  old 
clothes  of  Frodo’s  to  help  him  in  playing  the  part.  They  little 
thought  how  dangerous  that  part  might  prove. 

‘Excellent!’  said  Frodo,  when  he  understood  the  plan.  ‘We 
could  not  have  left  any  message  behind  for  Gandalf  other¬ 
wise.  I  don’t  know  whether  these  Riders  can  read  or  not,  of 
course,  but  I  should  not  have  dared  to  risk  a  written  message, 
in  case  they  got  in  and  searched  the  house.  But  if  Fatty  is 
willing  to  hold  the  fort,  and  I  can  be  sure  of  Gandalf  knowing 
the  way  we  have  gone,  that  decides  me.  I  am  going  into  the 
Old  Forest  first  thing  tomorrow.’ 

‘Well,  that’s  that,’  said  Pippin.  ‘On  the  whole  I  would  rather 
have  our  job  than  Fatty’s  -  waiting  here  till  Black  Riders 
come.’ 

‘You  wait  till  you  are  well  inside  the  Forest,’  said  Fredegar. 
‘You’ll  wish  you  were  back  here  with  me  before  this  time 
tomorrow.’ 

‘It’s  no  good  arguing  about  it  any  more,’  said  Merry.  ‘We 
have  still  got  to  tidy  up  and  put  the  finishing  touches  to  the 
packing,  before  we  get  to  bed.  I  shall  call  you  all  before  the 
break  of  day.’ 

When  at  last  he  had  got  to  bed,  Frodo  could  not  sleep  for 
some  time.  His  legs  ached.  He  was  glad  that  he  was  riding  in 
the  morning.  Eventually  he  fell  into  a  vague  dream,  in  which 
he  seemed  to  be  looking  out  of  a  high  window  over  a  dark 


142 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


sea  of  tangled  trees.  Down  below  among  the  roots  there  was 
the  sound  of  creatures  crawling  and  snuffling.  He  felt  sure 
they  would  smell  him  out  sooner  or  later. 

Then  he  heard  a  noise  in  the  distance.  At  first  he  thought 
it  was  a  great  wind  coming  over  the  leaves  of  the  forest.  Then 
he  knew  that  it  was  not  leaves,  but  the  sound  of  the  Sea 
far-off;  a  sound  he  had  never  heard  in  waking  life,  though  it 
had  often  troubled  his  dreams.  Suddenly  he  found  he  was 
out  in  the  open.  There  were  no  trees  after  all.  He  was  on  a 
dark  heath,  and  there  was  a  strange  salt  smell  in  the  air. 
Looking  up  he  saw  before  him  a  tall  white  tower,  standing 
alone  on  a  high  ridge.  A  great  desire  came  over  him  to  climb 
the  tower  and  see  the  Sea.  He  started  to  struggle  up  the  ridge 
towards  the  tower:  but  suddenly  a  light  came  in  the  sky,  and 
there  was  a  noise  of  thunder. 


Chapter  6 


THE  OLD  FOREST 


Frodo  woke  suddenly.  It  was  still  dark  in  the  room.  Merry 
was  standing  there  with  a  candle  in  one  hand,  and  banging 
on  the  door  with  the  other.  ‘All  right!  What  is  it?’  said  Frodo, 
still  shaken  and  bewildered. 

What  is  it!’  cried  Merry.  ‘It  is  time  to  get  up.  It  is  half  past 
four  and  very  foggy.  Come  on!  Sam  is  already  getting  breakfast 
ready.  Even  Pippin  is  up.  I  am  just  going  to  saddle  the  ponies, 
and  fetch  the  one  that  is  to  be  the  baggage-carrier.  Wake  that 
sluggard  Fatty!  At  least  he  must  get  up  and  see  us  off.’ 

Soon  after  six  o’clock  the  five  hobbits  were  ready  to  start. 
Fatty  Bolger  was  still  yawning.  They  stole  quietly  out  of  the 
house.  Merry  went  in  front  leading  a  laden  pony,  and  took 
his  way  along  a  path  that  went  through  a  spinney  behind  the 
house,  and  then  cut  across  several  fields.  The  leaves  of  trees 
were  glistening,  and  every  twig  was  dripping;  the  grass  was 
grey  with  cold  dew.  Everything  was  still,  and  far-away  noises 
seemed  near  and  clear:  fowls  chattering  in  a  yard,  someone 
closing  a  door  of  a  distant  house. 

In  their  shed  they  found  the  ponies:  sturdy  little  beasts  of 
the  kind  loved  by  hobbits,  not  speedy,  but  good  for  a  long 
day’s  work.  They  mounted,  and  soon  they  were  riding  off 
into  the  mist,  which  seemed  to  open  reluctantly  before  them 
and  close  forbiddingly  behind  them.  After  riding  for  about 
an  hour,  slowly  and  without  talking,  they  saw  the  Hedge 
looming  suddenly  ahead.  It  was  tall  and  netted  over  with 
silver  cobwebs. 

‘How  are  you  going  to  get  through  this?’  asked  Fredegar. 

‘Follow  me!’  said  Merry,  ‘and  you  will  see.’  He  turned  to 
the  left  along  the  Hedge,  and  soon  they  came  to  a  point  where 
it  bent  inwards,  running  along  the  lip  of  a  hollow.  A  cutting 


144 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


had  been  made,  at  some  distance  from  the  Hedge,  and  went 
sloping  gently  down  into  the  ground.  It  had  walls  of  brick  at 
the  sides,  which  rose  steadily,  until  suddenly  they  arched  over 
and  formed  a  tunnel  that  dived  deep  under  the  Hedge  and 
came  out  in  the  hollow  on  the  other  side. 

Here  Fatty  Bolger  halted.  ‘Good-bye,  Frodo!’  he  said.  ‘I 
wish  you  were  not  going  into  the  Forest.  I  only  hope  you  will 
not  need  rescuing  before  the  day  is  out.  But  good  luck  to  you 
-  today  and  every  day!’ 

‘If  there  are  no  worse  things  ahead  than  the  Old  Forest,  I 
shall  be  lucky,’  said  Frodo.  ‘Tell  Gandalf  to  hurry  along  the 
East  Road:  we  shall  soon  be  back  on  it  and  going  as  fast  as 
we  can.’  ‘Good-bye!’  they  cried,  and  rode  down  the  slope 
and  disappeared  from  Fredegar’s  sight  into  the  tunnel. 

It  was  dark  and  damp.  At  the  far  end  it  was  closed  by  a 
gate  of  thick-set  iron  bars.  Merry  got  down  and  unlocked  the 
gate,  and  when  they  had  all  passed  through  he  pushed  it  to 
again.  It  shut  with  a  clang,  and  the  lock  clicked.  The  sound 
was  ominous. 

‘There!’  said  Merry.  ‘You  have  left  the  Shire,  and  are  now 
outside,  and  on  the  edge  of  the  Old  Forest.’ 

‘Are  the  stories  about  it  true?’  asked  Pippin. 

‘I  don’t  know  what  stories  you  mean,’  Merry  answered.  ‘If 
you  mean  the  old  bogey-stories  Fatty’s  nurses  used  to  tell 
him,  about  goblins  and  wolves  and  things  of  that  sort,  I 
should  say  no.  At  any  rate  I  don’t  believe  them.  But  the 
Forest  is  queer.  Everything  in  it  is  very  much  more  alive, 
more  aware  of  what  is  going  on,  so  to  speak,  than  things  are 
in  the  Shire.  And  the  trees  do  not  like  strangers.  They  watch 
you.  They  are  usually  content  merely  to  watch  you,  as  long 
as  daylight  lasts,  and  don’t  do  much.  Occasionally  the  most 
unfriendly  ones  may  drop  a  branch,  or  stick  a  root  out,  or 
grasp  at  you  with  a  long  trailer.  But  at  night  things  can  be 
most  alarming,  or  so  I  am  told.  I  have  only  once  or  twice 
been  in  here  after  dark,  and  then  only  near  the  hedge.  I 
thought  all  the  trees  were  whispering  to  each  other,  passing 
news  and  plots  along  in  an  unintelligible  language;  and  the 


THE  OLD  FOREST 


145 


branches  swayed  and  groped  without  any  wind.  They  do  say 
the  trees  do  actually  move,  and  can  surround  strangers  and 
hem  them  in.  In  fact  long  ago  they  attacked  the  Hedge:  they 
came  and  planted  themselves  right  by  it,  and  leaned  over  it. 
But  the  hobbits  came  and  cut  down  hundreds  of  trees,  and 
made  a  great  bonfire  in  the  Forest,  and  burned  all  the  ground 
in  a  long  strip  east  of  the  Hedge.  After  that  the  trees  gave  up 
the  attack,  but  they  became  very  unfriendly.  There  is  still  a 
wide  bare  space  not  far  inside  where  the  bonfire  was  made.’ 

‘Is  it  only  the  trees  that  are  dangerous?’  asked  Pippin. 

‘There  are  various  queer  things  living  deep  in  the  Forest, 
and  on  the  far  side,’  said  Merry,  ‘or  at  least  I  have  heard  so; 
but  I  have  never  seen  any  of  them.  But  something  makes 
paths.  Whenever  one  comes  inside  one  finds  open  tracks;  but 
they  seem  to  shift  and  change  from  time  to  time  in  a  queer 
fashion.  Not  far  from  this  tunnel  there  is,  or  was  for  a  long 
time,  the  beginning  of  quite  a  broad  path  leading  to  the 
Bonfire  Glade,  and  then  on  more  or  less  in  our  direction,  east 
and  a  little  north.  That  is  the  path  I  am  going  to  try  and  find.’ 

The  hobbits  now  left  the  tunnel-gate  and  rode  across  the 
wide  hollow.  On  the  far  side  was  a  faint  path  leading  up  on 
to  the  floor  of  the  Forest,  a  hundred  yards  and  more  beyond 
the  Hedge;  but  it  vanished  as  soon  as  it  brought  them  under 
the  trees.  Looking  back  they  could  see  the  dark  line  of  the 
Hedge  through  the  stems  of  trees  that  were  already  thick 
about  them.  Looking  ahead  they  could  see  only  tree-trunks 
of  innumerable  sizes  and  shapes:  straight  or  bent,  twisted, 
leaning,  squat  or  slender,  smooth  or  gnarled  and  branched; 
and  all  the  stems  were  green  or  grey  with  moss  and  slimy, 
shaggy  growths. 

Merry  alone  seemed  fairly  cheerful.  ‘You  had  better  lead 
on  and  find  that  path,’  Frodo  said  to  him.  ‘Don’t  let  us  lose 
one  another,  or  forget  which  way  the  Hedge  lies!’ 

They  picked  a  way  among  the  trees,  and  their  ponies 
plodded  along,  carefully  avoiding  the  many  writhing  and 
interlacing  roots.  There  was  no  undergrowth.  The  ground 


146  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

was  rising  steadily,  and  as  they  went  forward  it  seemed  that 
the  trees  became  taller,  darker,  and  thicker.  There  was  no 
sound,  except  an  occasional  drip  of  moisture  falling  through 
the  still  leaves.  For  the  moment  there  was  no  whispering  or 
movement  among  the  branches;  but  they  all  got  an  uncom¬ 
fortable  feeling  that  they  were  being  watched  with  dis¬ 
approval,  deepening  to  dislike  and  even  enmity.  The  feeling 
steadily  grew,  until  they  found  themselves  looking  up  quickly, 
or  glancing  back  over  their  shoulders,  as  if  they  expected  a 
sudden  blow. 

There  was  not  as  yet  any  sign  of  a  path,  and  the  trees 
seemed  constantly  to  bar  their  way.  Pippin  suddenly  felt  that 
he  could  not  bear  it  any  longer,  and  without  warning  let  out 
a  shout.  ‘Oi!  Oi!’  he  cried.  ‘I  am  not  going  to  do  anything. 
Just  let  me  pass  through,  will  you!’ 

The  others  halted  startled;  but  the  cry  fell  as  if  muffled  by 
a  heavy  curtain.  There  was  no  echo  or  answer  though  the 
wood  seemed  to  become  more  crowded  and  more  watchful 
than  before. 

‘I  should  not  shout,  if  I  were  you,’  said  Merry.  ‘It  does 
more  harm  than  good.’ 

Frodo  began  to  wonder  if  it  were  possible  to  find  a  way 
through,  and  if  he  had  been  right  to  make  the  others  come 
into  this  abominable  wood.  Merry  was  looking  from  side  to 
side,  and  seemed  already  uncertain  which  way  to  go.  Pippin 
noticed  it.  ‘It  has  not  taken  you  long  to  lose  us,’  he  said.  But  at 
that  moment  Merry  gave  a  whistle  of  relief  and  pointed  ahead. 

‘Well,  well!’  he  said.  ‘These  trees  do  shift.  There  is  the 
Bonfire  Glade  in  front  of  us  (or  I  hope  so),  but  the  path  to  it 
seems  to  have  moved  away!’ 

The  light  grew  clearer  as  they  went  forward.  Suddenly  they 
came  out  of  the  trees  and  found  themselves  in  a  wide  circular 
space.  There  was  sky  above  them,  blue  and  clear  to  their 
surprise,  for  down  under  the  Forest-roof  they  had  not  been 
able  to  see  the  rising  morning  and  the  lifting  of  the  mist.  The 
sun  was  not,  however,  high  enough  yet  to  shine  down  into 


THE  OLD  FOREST 


147 


the  clearing,  though  its  light  was  on  the  tree-tops.  The  leaves 
were  all  thicker  and  greener  about  the  edges  of  the  glade, 
enclosing  it  with  an  almost  solid  wall.  No  tree  grew  there, 
only  rough  grass  and  many  tall  plants:  stalky  and  faded  hem¬ 
locks  and  wood-parsley,  fire-weed  seeding  into  fluffy  ashes, 
and  rampant  nettles  and  thistles.  A  dreary  place:  but  it 
seemed  a  charming  and  cheerful  garden  after  the  close  Forest. 

The  hobbits  felt  encouraged,  and  looked  up  hopefully  at 
the  broadening  daylight  in  the  sky.  At  the  far  side  of  the  glade 
there  was  a  break  in  the  wall  of  trees,  and  a  clear  path  beyond 
it.  They  could  see  it  running  on  into  the  wood,  wide  in  places 
and  open  above,  though  every  now  and  again  the  trees  drew 
in  and  overshadowed  it  with  their  dark  boughs.  Up  this  path 
they  rode.  They  were  still  climbing  gently,  but  they  now  went 
much  quicker,  and  with  better  heart;  for  it  seemed  to  them 
that  the  Forest  had  relented,  and  was  going  to  let  them  pass 
unhindered  after  all. 

But  after  a  while  the  air  began  to  get  hot  and  stuffy.  The 
trees  drew  close  again  on  either  side,  and  they  could  no  longer 
see  far  ahead.  Now  stronger  than  ever  they  felt  again  the 
ill  will  of  the  wood  pressing  on  them.  So  silent  was  it  that 
the  fall  of  their  ponies’  hoofs,  rustling  on  dead  leaves  and 
occasionally  stumbling  on  hidden  roots,  seemed  to  thud  in 
their  ears.  Frodo  tried  to  sing  a  song  to  encourage  them,  but 
his  voice  sank  to  a  murmur. 

O!  Wanderers  in  the  shadowed  land 
despair  not!  For  though  dark  they  stand, 
all  woods  there  be  must  end  at  last, 
and  see  the  open  sun  go  past: 
the  setting  sun,  the  rising  sun, 
the  day’s  end,  or  the  day  begun. 

For  east  or  west  all  woods  must  fail .  .  . 

Fail-  even  as  he  said  the  word  his  voice  faded  into  silence. 
The  air  seemed  heavy  and  the  making  of  words  wearisome. 
Just  behind  them  a  large  branch  fell  from  an  old  overhanging 


148  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

tree  with  a  crash  into  the  path.  The  trees  seemed  to  close  in 
before  them. 

‘They  do  not  like  all  that  about  ending  and  failing,’  said 
Merry.  ‘I  should  not  sing  any  more  at  present.  Wait  till  we  do 
get  to  the  edge,  and  then  we’ll  turn  and  give  them  a  rousing 
chorus!’ 

He  spoke  cheerfully,  and  if  he  felt  any  great  anxiety,  he  did 
not  show  it.  The  others  did  not  answer.  They  were  depressed. 
A  heavy  weight  was  settling  steadily  on  Frodo’s  heart,  and 
he  regretted  now  with  every  step  forward  that  he  had  ever 
thought  of  challenging  the  menace  of  the  trees.  He  was, 
indeed,  just  about  to  stop  and  propose  going  back  (if  that 
was  still  possible),  when  things  took  a  new  turn.  The  path 
stopped  climbing,  and  became  for  a  while  nearly  level.  The 
dark  trees  drew  aside,  and  ahead  they  could  see  the  path  going 
almost  straight  forward.  Before  them,  but  some  distance  off, 
there  stood  a  green  hill-top,  treeless,  rising  like  a  bald  head 
out  of  the  encircling  wood.  The  path  seemed  to  be  making 
directly  for  it. 

They  now  hurried  forward  again,  delighted  with  the 
thought  of  climbing  out  for  a  while  above  the  roof  of  the 
Forest.  The  path  dipped,  and  then  again  began  to  climb 
upwards,  leading  them  at  last  to  the  foot  of  the  steep  hillside. 
There  it  left  the  trees  and  faded  into  the  turf.  The  wood  stood 
all  round  the  hill  like  thick  hair  that  ended  sharply  in  a  circle 
round  a  shaven  crown. 

The  hobbits  led  their  ponies  up,  winding  round  and  round 
until  they  reached  the  top.  There  they  stood  and  gazed  about 
them.  The  air  was  gleaming  and  sunlit,  but  hazy;  and  they 
could  not  see  to  any  great  distance.  Near  at  hand  the  mist 
was  now  almost  gone;  though  here  and  there  it  lay  in  hollows 
of  the  wood,  and  to  the  south  of  them,  out  of  a  deep  fold 
cutting  right  across  the  Forest,  the  fog  still  rose  like  steam  or 
wisps  of  white  smoke. 

‘That,’  said  Merry,  pointing  with  his  hand,  ‘that  is  the  line 
of  the  Withywindle.  It  comes  down  out  of  the  Downs  and 


THE  OLD  FOREST 


149 


flows  south-west  through  the  midst  of  the  Forest  to  join  the 
Brandywine  below  Haysend.  We  don’t  want  to  go  that  way! 
The  Withywindle  valley  is  said  to  be  the  queerest  part  of  the 
whole  wood  -  the  centre  from  which  all  the  queerness  comes, 
as  it  were.’ 

The  others  looked  in  the  direction  that  Merry  pointed  out, 
but  they  could  see  little  but  mists  over  the  damp  and  deep-cut 
valley;  and  beyond  it  the  southern  half  of  the  Forest  faded 
from  view. 

The  sun  on  the  hill-top  was  now  getting  hot.  It  must  have 
been  about  eleven  o’clock;  but  the  autumn  haze  still  pre¬ 
vented  them  from  seeing  much  in  other  directions.  In  the 
west  they  could  not  make  out  either  the  line  of  the  Hedge  or 
the  valley  of  the  Brandywine  beyond  it.  Northward,  where 
they  looked  most  hopefully,  they  could  see  nothing  that  might 
be  the  line  of  the  great  East  Road,  for  which  they  were 
making.  They  were  on  an  island  in  a  sea  of  trees,  and  the 
horizon  was  veiled. 

On  the  south-eastern  side  the  ground  fell  very  steeply,  as 
if  the  slopes  of  the  hill  were  continued  far  down  under  the 
trees,  like  island-shores  that  really  are  the  sides  of  a  mountain 
rising  out  of  deep  waters.  They  sat  on  the  green  edge  and 
looked  out  over  the  woods  below  them,  while  they  ate  their 
mid-day  meal.  As  the  sun  rose  and  passed  noon  they 
glimpsed  far  off  in  the  east  the  grey-green  lines  of  the  Downs 
that  lay  beyond  the  Old  Forest  on  that  side.  That  cheered 
them  greatly;  for  it  was  good  to  see  a  sight  of  anything  beyond 
the  wood’s  borders,  though  they  did  not  mean  to  go  that  way, 
if  they  could  help  it:  the  Barrow-downs  had  as  sinister  a 
reputation  in  hobbit-legend  as  the  Forest  itself. 

At  length  they  made  up  their  minds  to  go  on  again.  The  path 
that  had  brought  them  to  the  hill  reappeared  on  the  north¬ 
ward  side;  but  they  had  not  followed  it  far  before  they  became 
aware  that  it  was  bending  steadily  to  the  right.  Soon  it  began 
to  descend  rapidly  and  they  guessed  that  it  must  actually 
be  heading  towards  the  Withywindle  valley:  not  at  all  the 


150 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


direction  they  wished  to  take.  After  some  discussion  they 
decided  to  leave  this  misleading  path  and  strike  northward; 
for  although  they  had  not  been  able  to  see  it  from  the  hill-top, 
the  Road  must  lie  that  way,  and  it  could  not  be  many  miles 
off.  Also  northward,  and  to  the  left  of  the  path,  the  land 
seemed  to  be  drier  and  more  open,  climbing  up  to  slopes 
where  the  trees  were  thinner,  and  pines  and  firs  replaced  the 
oaks  and  ashes  and  other  strange  and  nameless  trees  of  the 
denser  wood. 

At  first  their  choice  seemed  to  be  good:  they  got  along  at 
a  fair  speed,  though  whenever  they  got  a  glimpse  of  the  sun 
in  an  open  glade  they  seemed  unaccountably  to  have  veered 
eastwards.  But  after  a  time  the  trees  began  to  close  in  again, 
just  where  they  had  appeared  from  a  distance  to  be  thinner 
and  less  tangled.  Then  deep  folds  in  the  ground  were  dis¬ 
covered  unexpectedly,  like  the  ruts  of  great  giant-wheels  or 
wide  moats  and  sunken  roads  long  disused  and  choked  with 
brambles.  These  lay  usually  right  across  their  line  of  march, 
and  could  only  be  crossed  by  scrambling  down  and  out  again, 
which  was  troublesome  and  difficult  with  their  ponies.  Each 
time  they  climbed  down  they  found  the  hollow  filled  with  thick 
bushes  and  matted  undergrowth,  which  somehow  would  not 
yield  to  the  left,  but  only  gave  way  when  they  turned  to  the 
right;  and  they  had  to  go  some  distance  along  the  bottom 
before  they  could  find  a  way  up  the  further  bank.  Each  time 
they  clambered  out,  the  trees  seemed  deeper  and  darker;  and 
always  to  the  left  and  upwards  it  was  most  difficult  to  find  a 
way,  and  they  were  forced  to  the  right  and  downwards. 

After  an  hour  or  two  they  had  lost  all  clear  sense  of  direc¬ 
tion,  though  they  knew  well  enough  that  they  had  long  ceased 
to  go  northward  at  all.  They  were  being  headed  off,  and  were 
simply  following  a  course  chosen  for  them  -  eastwards  and 
southwards,  into  the  heart  of  the  Forest  and  not  out  of  it. 

The  afternoon  was  wearing  away  when  they  scrambled  and 
stumbled  into  a  fold  that  was  wider  and  deeper  than  any  they 
had  yet  met.  It  was  so  steep  and  overhung  that  it  proved 


THE  OLD  FOREST 


151 

impossible  to  climb  out  of  it  again,  either  forwards  or  back¬ 
wards,  without  leaving  their  ponies  and  their  baggage  behind. 
All  they  could  do  was  to  follow  the  fold  -  downwards.  The 
ground  grew  soft,  and  in  places  boggy;  springs  appeared  in 
the  banks,  and  soon  they  found  themselves  following  a  brook 
that  trickled  and  babbled  through  a  weedy  bed.  Then  the 
ground  began  to  fall  rapidly,  and  the  brook  growing  strong 
and  noisy,  flowed  and  leaped  swiftly  downhill.  They  were  in 
a  deep  dim-lit  gully  over-arched  by  trees  high  above  them. 

After  stumbling  along  for  some  way  along  the  stream,  they 
came  quite  suddenly  out  of  the  gloom.  As  if  through  a  gate 
they  saw  the  sunlight  before  them.  Coming  to  the  opening 
they  found  that  they  had  made  their  way  down  through  a 
cleft  in  a  high  steep  bank,  almost  a  cliff.  At  its  feet  was  a 
wide  space  of  grass  and  reeds;  and  in  the  distance  could  be 
glimpsed  another  bank  almost  as  steep.  A  golden  afternoon 
of  late  sunshine  lay  warm  and  drowsy  upon  the  hidden  land 
between.  In  the  midst  of  it  there  wound  lazily  a  dark  river  of 
brown  water,  bordered  with  ancient  willows,  arched  over 
with  willows,  blocked  with  fallen  willows,  and  flecked  with 
thousands  of  faded  willow-leaves.  The  air  was  thick  with 
them,  fluttering  yellow  from  the  branches;  for  there  was  a 
warm  and  gentle  breeze  blowing  softly  in  the  valley,  and  the 
reeds  were  rustling,  and  the  willow-boughs  were  creaking. 

‘Well,  now  I  have  at  least  some  notion  of  where  we  are!’ 
said  Merry.  We  have  come  almost  in  the  opposite  direction 
to  which  we  intended.  This  is  the  River  Withywindle!  I  will 
go  on  and  explore.’ 

He  passed  out  into  the  sunshine  and  disappeared  into  the 
long  grasses.  After  a  while  he  reappeared,  and  reported  that 
there  was  fairly  solid  ground  between  the  cliff-foot  and  the 
river;  in  some  places  firm  turf  went  down  to  the  water’s  edge. 
‘What’s  more,’  he  said,  ‘there  seems  to  be  something  like  a 
footpath  winding  along  on  this  side  of  the  river.  If  we  turn 
left  and  follow  it,  we  shall  be  bound  to  come  out  on  the  east 
side  of  the  Forest  eventually.’ 

‘I  dare  say!’  said  Pippin.  ‘That  is,  if  the  track  goes  on  so 


152 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


far,  and  does  not  simply  lead  us  into  a  bog  and  leave  us  there. 
Who  made  the  track,  do  you  suppose,  and  why?  I  am  sure  it 
was  not  for  our  benefit.  I  am  getting  very  suspicious  of  this 
Forest  and  everything  in  it,  and  I  begin  to  believe  all  the 
stories  about  it.  And  have  you  any  idea  how  far  eastward  we 
should  have  to  go?’ 

‘No,’  said  Merry,  ‘I  haven’t.  I  don’t  know  in  the  least  how 
far  down  the  Withywindle  we  are,  or  who  could  possibly 
come  here  often  enough  to  make  a  path  along  it.  But  there  is 
no  other  way  out  that  I  can  see  or  think  of.’ 

There  being  nothing  else  for  it,  they  filed  out,  and  Merry 
led  them  to  the  path  that  he  had  discovered.  Everywhere  the 
reeds  and  grasses  were  lush  and  tall,  in  places  far  above  their 
heads;  but  once  found,  the  path  was  easy  to  follow,  as  it 
turned  and  twisted,  picking  out  the  sounder  ground  among 
the  bogs  and  pools.  Here  and  there  it  passed  over  other  rills, 
running  down  gullies  into  the  Withywindle  out  of  the  higher 
forest-lands,  and  at  these  points  there  were  tree-trunks  or 
bundles  of  brushwood  laid  carefully  across. 

The  hobbits  began  to  feel  very  hot.  There  were  armies  of 
flies  of  all  kinds  buzzing  round  their  ears,  and  the  afternoon 
sun  was  burning  on  their  backs.  At  last  they  came  suddenly 
into  a  thin  shade;  great  grey  branches  reached  across  the 
path.  Each  step  forward  became  more  reluctant  than  the  last. 
Sleepiness  seemed  to  be  creeping  out  of  the  ground  and  up 
their  legs,  and  falling  softly  out  of  the  air  upon  their  heads 
and  eyes. 

Frodo  felt  his  chin  go  down  and  his  head  nod.  Just  in  front 
of  him  Pippin  fell  forward  on  to  his  knees.  Frodo  halted.  ‘It’s 
no  good,’  he  heard  Merry  saying.  ‘Can’t  go  another  step  with¬ 
out  rest.  Must  have  nap.  It’s  cool  under  the  willows.  Less  flies!’ 

Frodo  did  not  like  the  sound  of  this.  ‘Come  on!’  he  cried. 
We  can’t  have  a  nap  yet.  We  must  get  clear  of  the  Forest 
first.’  But  the  others  were  too  far  gone  to  care.  Beside  them 
Sam  stood  yawning  and  blinking  stupidly. 

Suddenly  Frodo  himself  felt  sleep  overwhelming  him.  His 


THE  OLD  FOREST 


153 


head  swam.  There  now  seemed  hardly  a  sound  in  the  air. 
The  flies  had  stopped  buzzing.  Only  a  gentle  noise  on  the 
edge  of  hearing,  a  soft  fluttering  as  of  a  song  half  whispered, 
seemed  to  stir  in  the  boughs  above.  He  lifted  his  heavy  eyes 
and  saw  leaning  over  him  a  huge  willow-tree,  old  and  hoary. 
Enormous  it  looked,  its  sprawling  branches  going  up  like 
reaching  arms  with  many  long-fingered  hands,  its  knotted 
and  twisted  trunk  gaping  in  wide  fissures  that  creaked  faintly 
as  the  boughs  moved.  The  leaves  fluttering  against  the  bright 
sky  dazzled  him,  and  he  toppled  over,  lying  where  he  fell 
upon  the  grass. 

Merry  and  Pippin  dragged  themselves  forward  and  lay 
down  with  their  backs  to  the  willow-trunk.  Behind  them  the 
great  cracks  gaped  wide  to  receive  them  as  the  tree  swayed 
and  creaked.  They  looked  up  at  the  grey  and  yellow  leaves, 
moving  softly  against  the  light,  and  singing.  They  shut  their 
eyes,  and  then  it  seemed  that  they  could  almost  hear  words, 
cool  words,  saying  something  about  water  and  sleep.  They 
gave  themselves  up  to  the  spell  and  fell  fast  asleep  at  the  foot 
of  the  great  grey  willow. 

Frodo  lay  for  a  while  fighting  with  the  sleep  that  was  over¬ 
powering  him;  then  with  an  effort  he  struggled  to  his  feet 
again.  He  felt  a  compelling  desire  for  cool  water.  ‘Wait  for 
me,  Sam,’  he  stammered.  ‘Must  bathe  feet  a  minute.’ 

Half  in  a  dream  he  wandered  forward  to  the  riverward  side 
of  the  tree,  where  great  winding  roots  grew  out  into  the 
stream,  like  gnarled  dragonets  straining  down  to  drink.  He 
straddled  one  of  these,  and  paddled  his  hot  feet  in  the  cool 
brown  water;  and  there  he  too  suddenly  fell  asleep  with  his 
back  against  the  tree. 

Sam  sat  down  and  scratched  his  head,  and  yawned  like  a 
cavern.  He  was  worried.  The  afternoon  was  getting  late,  and 
he  thought  this  sudden  sleepiness  uncanny.  ‘There’s  more 
behind  this  than  sun  and  warm  air,’  he  muttered  to  himself. 
‘I  don’t  like  this  great  big  tree.  I  don’t  trust  it.  Hark  at  it 
singing  about  sleep  now!  This  won’t  do  at  all!’ 


154 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


He  pulled  himself  to  his  feet,  and  staggered  off  to  see  what 
had  become  of  the  ponies.  He  found  that  two  had  wandered 
on  a  good  way  along  the  path;  and  he  had  just  caught  them 
and  brought  them  back  towards  the  others,  when  he  heard 
two  noises;  one  loud,  and  the  other  soft  but  very  clear.  One 
was  the  splash  of  something  heavy  falling  into  the  water;  the 
other  was  a  noise  like  the  snick  of  a  lock  when  a  door  quietly 
closes  fast. 

He  rushed  back  to  the  bank.  Frodo  was  in  the  water  close 
to  the  edge,  and  a  great  tree-root  seemed  to  be  over  him  and 
holding  him  down,  but  he  was  not  struggling.  Sam  gripped 
him  by  the  jacket,  and  dragged  him  from  under  the  root;  and 
then  with  difficulty  hauled  him  on  to  the  bank.  Almost  at 
once  he  woke,  and  coughed  and  spluttered. 

‘Do  you  know,  Sam,’  he  said  at  length,  ‘the  beastly  tree 
threw  me  in!  I  felt  it.  The  big  root  just  twisted  round  and 
tipped  me  in!’ 

‘You  were  dreaming  I  expect,  Mr.  Frodo,’  said  Sam.  ‘You 
shouldn’t  sit  in  such  a  place,  if  you  feel  sleepy.’ 

‘What  about  the  others?’  Frodo  asked.  ‘I  wonder  what  sort 
of  dreams  they  are  having.’ 

They  went  round  to  the  other  side  of  the  tree,  and  then 
Sam  understood  the  click  that  he  had  heard.  Pippin  had 
vanished.  The  crack  by  which  he  had  laid  himself  had  closed 
together,  so  that  not  a  chink  could  be  seen.  Merry  was 
trapped:  another  crack  had  closed  about  his  waist;  his  legs 
lay  outside,  but  the  rest  of  him  was  inside  a  dark  opening, 
the  edges  of  which  gripped  like  a  pair  of  pincers. 

Frodo  and  Sam  beat  first  upon  the  tree-trunk  where  Pippin 
had  lain.  They  then  struggled  frantically  to  pull  open  the  jaws 
of  the  crack  that  held  poor  Merry.  It  was  quite  useless. 

‘What  a  foul  thing  to  happen!’  cried  Frodo  wildly.  ‘Why  did 
we  ever  come  into  this  dreadful  Forest?  I  wish  we  were  all  back 
at  Crickhollow!’  He  kicked  the  tree  with  all  his  strength,  heed¬ 
less  of  his  own  feet.  A  hardly  perceptible  shiver  ran  through 
the  stem  and  up  into  the  branches;  the  leaves  rustled  and 
whispered,  but  with  a  sound  now  of  faint  and  far-off  laughter. 


THE  OLD  FOREST  155 

‘I  suppose  we  haven’t  got  an  axe  among  our  luggage,  Mr. 
Frodo?’  asked  Sam. 

‘I  brought  a  little  hatchet  for  chopping  firewood,’  said 
Frodo.  ‘That  wouldn’t  be  much  use.’ 

‘Wait  a  minute!’  cried  Sam,  struck  by  an  idea  suggested  by 
firewood.  ‘We  might  do  something  with  fire!’ 

We  might,’  said  Frodo  doubtfully.  ‘We  might  succeed  in 
roasting  Pippin  alive  inside.’ 

We  might  try  to  hurt  or  frighten  this  tree  to  begin  with,’ 
said  Sam  fiercely.  ‘If  it  don’t  let  them  go,  I’ll  have  it  down,  if 
I  have  to  gnaw  it.’  He  ran  to  the  ponies  and  before  long  came 
back  with  two  tinder-boxes  and  a  hatchet. 

Quickly  they  gathered  dry  grass  and  leaves,  and  bits  of 
bark;  and  made  a  pile  of  broken  twigs  and  chopped  sticks. 
These  they  heaped  against  the  trunk  on  the  far  side  of  the 
tree  from  the  prisoners.  As  soon  as  Sam  had  struck  a  spark 
into  the  tinder,  it  kindled  the  dry  grass  and  a  flurry  of  flame 
and  smoke  went  up.  The  twigs  crackled.  Little  fingers  of  fire 
licked  against  the  dry  scored  rind  of  the  ancient  tree  and 
scorched  it.  A  tremor  ran  through  the  whole  willow.  The 
leaves  seemed  to  hiss  above  their  heads  with  a  sound  of  pain 
and  anger.  A  loud  scream  came  from  Merry,  and  from  far 
inside  the  tree  they  heard  Pippin  give  a  muffled  yell. 

‘Put  it  out!  Put  it  out!’  cried  Merry.  ‘He’ll  squeeze  me  in 
two,  if  you  don’t.  He  says  so!’ 

Who?  What?’  shouted  Frodo,  rushing  round  to  the  other 
side  of  the  tree. 

‘Put  it  out!  Put  it  out!’  begged  Merry.  The  branches  of  the 
willow  began  to  sway  violently.  There  was  a  sound  as  of  a 
wind  rising  and  spreading  outwards  to  the  branches  of  all  the 
other  trees  round  about,  as  though  they  had  dropped  a  stone 
into  the  quiet  slumber  of  the  river-valley  and  set  up  ripples 
of  anger  that  ran  out  over  the  whole  Forest.  Sam  kicked  at 
the  little  fire  and  stamped  out  the  sparks.  But  Frodo,  without 
any  clear  idea  of  why  he  did  so,  or  what  he  hoped  for,  ran 
along  the  path  crying  help!  help!  help!  It  seemed  to  him  that 
he  could  hardly  hear  the  sound  of  his  own  shrill  voice:  it  was 


156 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


blown  away  from  him  by  the  willow-wind  and  drowned  in  a 
clamour  of  leaves,  as  soon  as  the  words  left  his  mouth.  He 
felt  desperate:  lost  and  witless. 

Suddenly  he  stopped.  There  was  an  answer,  or  so  he 
thought;  but  it  seemed  to  come  from  behind  him,  away  down 
the  path  further  back  in  the  Forest.  He  turned  round  and 
listened,  and  soon  there  could  be  no  doubt:  someone  was 
singing  a  song;  a  deep  glad  voice  was  singing  carelessly  and 
happily,  but  it  was  singing  nonsense: 

Hey  dol!  merry  doll  ring  a  dong  dillo! 

Ring  a  dong!  hop  along!  fal  lal  the  willow! 

Tom  Bom,  jolly  Tom,  Tom  Bombadillo! 

Half  hopeful  and  half  afraid  of  some  new  danger,  Frodo 
and  Sam  now  both  stood  still.  Suddenly  out  of  a  long  string 
of  nonsense-words  (or  so  they  seemed)  the  voice  rose  up 
loud  and  clear  and  burst  into  this  song: 

Hey!  Come  merry  dol!  derry  dol!  My  darling! 

Light  goes  the  weather-wind  and  the  feathered  starling. 

Down  along  under  Hill,  shining  in  the  sunlight, 

Waiting  on  the  doorstep  for  the  cold  starlight, 

There  my  pretty  lady  is,  River-woman’s  daughter, 

Slender  as  the  willow-wand,  clearer  than  the  water. 

Old  Tom  Bombadil  water-lilies  bringing 

Comes  hopping  home  again.  Can  you  hear  him  singing? 

Hey!  Come  merry  dol!  derry  dol!  and  merry-o, 

Goldberry,  Goldberry,  merry  yellow  berry-o! 

Poor  old  Willow-man,  you  tuck  your  roots  away! 

Tom’s  in  a  hurry  now.  Evening  will  follow  day. 

Tom’s  going  home  again  water-lilies  bringing. 

Hey!  Come  derry  dol!  Can  you  hear  me  singing? 

Frodo  and  Sam  stood  as  if  enchanted.  The  wind  puffed 
out.  The  leaves  hung  silently  again  on  stiff  branches.  There 
was  another  burst  of  song,  and  then  suddenly,  hopping  and 


THE  OLD  FOREST 


157 


dancing  along  the  path,  there  appeared  above  the  reeds  an 
old  battered  hat  with  a  tall  crown  and  a  long  blue  feather 
stuck  in  the  band.  With  another  hop  and  a  bound  there  came 
into  view  a  man,  or  so  it  seemed.  At  any  rate  he  was  too  large 
and  heavy  for  a  hobbit,  if  not  quite  tall  enough  for  one  of  the 
Big  People,  though  he  made  noise  enough  for  one,  stumping 
along  with  great  yellow  boots  on  his  thick  legs,  and  charging 
through  grass  and  rushes  like  a  cow  going  down  to  drink.  He 
had  a  blue  coat  and  a  long  brown  beard;  his  eyes  were  blue 
and  bright,  and  his  face  was  red  as  a  ripe  apple,  but  creased 
into  a  hundred  wrinkles  of  laughter.  In  his  hands  he  carried 
on  a  large  leaf  as  on  a  tray  a  small  pile  of  white  water-lilies. 

‘Help!’  cried  Frodo  and  Sam  running  towards  him  with 
their  hands  stretched  out. 

Whoa!  Whoa!  steady  there!’  cried  the  old  man,  holding  up 
one  hand,  and  they  stopped  short,  as  if  they  had  been  struck 
stiff.  ‘Now,  my  little  fellows,  where  be  you  a-going  to,  puffing 
like  a  bellows?  What’s  the  matter  here  then?  Do  you  know 
who  I  am?  I’m  Tom  Bombadil.  Tell  me  what’s  your  trouble! 
Tom’s  in  a  hurry  now.  Don’t  you  crush  my  lilies!’ 

‘My  friends  are  caught  in  the  willow-tree,’  cried  Frodo 
breathlessly. 

‘Master  Merry’s  being  squeezed  in  a  crack!’  cried  Sam. 

‘What?’  shouted  Tom  Bombadil,  leaping  up  in  the  air.  ‘Old 
Man  Willow?  Naught  worse  than  that,  eh?  That  can  soon  be 
mended.  I  know  the  tune  for  him.  Old  grey  Willow-man!  I’ll 
freeze  his  marrow  cold,  if  he  don’t  behave  himself.  I’ll  sing 
his  roots  off.  I’ll  sing  a  wind  up  and  blow  leaf  and  branch 
away.  Old  Man  Willow!’ 

Setting  down  his  lilies  carefully  on  the  grass,  he  ran  to  the 
tree.  There  he  saw  Merry’s  feet  still  sticking  out  -  the  rest 
had  already  been  drawn  further  inside.  Tom  put  his  mouth 
to  the  crack  and  began  singing  into  it  in  a  low  voice.  They 
could  not  catch  the  words,  but  evidently  Merry  was  aroused. 
His  legs  began  to  luck.  Tom  sprang  away,  and  breaking  off 
a  hanging  branch  smote  the  side  of  the  willow  with  it.  ‘You 
let  them  out  again,  Old  Man  Willow!’  he  said.  ‘What  be  you 


i58 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


a-thinking  of?  You  should  not  be  waking.  Eat  earth!  Dig 
deep!  Drink  water!  Go  to  sleep!  Bombadil  is  talking!’  He 
then  seized  Merry’s  feet  and  drew  him  out  of  the  suddenly 
widening  crack. 

There  was  a  tearing  creak  and  the  other  crack  split  open, 
and  out  of  it  Pippin  sprang,  as  if  he  had  been  lucked.  Then 
with  a  loud  snap  both  cracks  closed  fast  again.  A  shudder  ran 
through  the  tree  from  root  to  tip,  and  complete  silence  fell. 

‘Thank  you!’  said  the  hobbits,  one  after  the  other. 

Tom  Bombadil  burst  out  laughing.  ‘Well,  my  little  fellows!’ 
said  he,  stooping  so  that  he  peered  into  their  faces.  ‘You  shall 
come  home  with  me!  The  table  is  all  laden  with  yellow  cream, 
honeycomb,  and  white  bread  and  butter.  Goldberry  is  wait¬ 
ing.  Time  enough  for  questions  around  the  supper  table.  You 
follow  after  me  as  quick  as  you  are  able!’  With  that  he  picked 
up  his  lilies,  and  then  with  a  beckoning  wave  of  his  hand 
went  hopping  and  dancing  along  the  path  eastward,  still 
singing  loudly  and  nonsensically. 

Too  surprised  and  too  relieved  to  talk,  the  hobbits  followed 
after  him  as  fast  as  they  could.  But  that  was  not  fast  enough. 
Tom  soon  disappeared  in  front  of  them,  and  the  noise  of  his 
singing  got  fainter  and  further  away.  Suddenly  his  voice  came 
floating  back  to  them  in  a  loud  halloo! 

Hop  along,  my  little  friends,  up  the  Withywindle! 

Tom’s  going  on  ahead  candles  for  to  kindle. 

Down  west  sinks  the  Sun:  soon  you  will  be  groping. 

When  the  night-shadows  fall,  then  the  door  will  open, 

Out  of  the  window-panes  light  will  twinkle  yellow. 

Fear  no  alder  black!  Heed  no  hoary  willow! 

Fear  neither  root  nor  bough!  Tom  goes  on  before  you. 

Hey  now!  merry  dol!  We’ll  be  waiting  for  you! 

After  that  the  hobbits  heard  no  more.  Almost  at  once  the 
sun  seemed  to  sink  into  the  trees  behind  them.  They  thought 
of  the  slanting  light  of  evening  glittering  on  the  Brandywine 
River,  and  the  windows  of  Bucklebury  beginning  to  gleam 


THE  OLD  FOREST 


159 


with  hundreds  of  lights.  Great  shadows  fell  across  them; 
trunks  and  branches  of  trees  hung  dark  and  threatening  over 
the  path.  White  mists  began  to  rise  and  curl  on  the  surface 
of  the  river  and  stray  about  the  roots  of  the  trees  upon  its 
borders.  Out  of  the  very  ground  at  their  feet  a  shadowy  steam 
arose  and  mingled  with  the  swiftly  falling  dusk. 

It  became  difficult  to  follow  the  path,  and  they  were  very 
tired.  Their  legs  seemed  leaden.  Strange  furtive  noises  ran 
among  the  bushes  and  reeds  on  either  side  of  them;  and  if 
they  looked  up  to  the  pale  sky,  they  caught  sight  of  queer 
gnarled  and  knobbly  faces  that  gloomed  dark  against  the 
twilight,  and  leered  down  at  them  from  the  high  bank  and 
the  edges  of  the  wood.  They  began  to  feel  that  all  this  country 
was  unreal,  and  that  they  were  stumbling  through  an  ominous 
dream  that  led  to  no  awakening. 

Just  as  they  felt  their  feet  slowing  down  to  a  standstill,  they 
noticed  that  the  ground  was  gently  rising.  The  water  began 
to  murmur.  In  the  darkness  they  caught  the  white  glimmer 
of  foam,  where  the  river  flowed  over  a  short  fall.  Then  sud¬ 
denly  the  trees  came  to  an  end  and  the  mists  were  left  behind. 
They  stepped  out  from  the  Forest,  and  found  a  wide  sweep 
of  grass  welling  up  before  them.  The  river,  now  small  and 
swift,  was  leaping  merrily  down  to  meet  them,  glinting  here 
and  there  in  the  light  of  the  stars,  which  were  already  shining 
in  the  sky. 

The  grass  under  their  feet  was  smooth  and  short,  as  if  it 
had  been  mown  or  shaven.  The  eaves  of  the  Forest  behind 
were  clipped,  and  trim  as  a  hedge.  The  path  was  now  plain 
before  them,  well- tended  and  bordered  with  stone.  It  wound 
up  on  to  the  top  of  a  grassy  knoll,  now  grey  under  the  pale 
starry  night;  and  there,  still  high  above  them  on  a  further 
slope,  they  saw  the  twinkling  lights  of  a  house.  Down  again 
the  path  went,  and  then  up  again,  up  a  long  smooth  hillside 
of  turf,  towards  the  light.  Suddenly  a  wide  yellow  beam 
flowed  out  brightly  from  a  door  that  was  opened.  There  was 
Tom  Bombadil’s  house  before  them,  up,  down,  under  hill. 
Behind  it  a  steep  shoulder  of  the  land  lay  grey  and  bare,  and 


i6o 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


beyond  that  the  dark  shapes  of  the  Barrow-downs  stalked 
away  into  the  eastern  night. 

They  all  hurried  forward,  hobbits  and  ponies.  Already  half 
their  weariness  and  all  their  fears  had  fallen  from  them.  Hey! 
Come  merry  dol!  rolled  out  the  song  to  greet  them. 

Hey!  Come  derry  dol!  Hop  along,  my  hearties! 

Hobbits!  Ponies  all!  We  are  fond  of  parties. 

Now  let  the  fun  begin!  Let  us  sing  together! 

Then  another  clear  voice,  as  young  and  as  ancient  as 
Spring,  like  the  song  of  a  glad  water  flowing  down  into  the 
night  from  a  bright  morning  in  the  hills,  came  falling  like 
silver  to  meet  them: 

Now  let  the  song  begin!  Let  us  sing  together 

Of  sun,  stars,  moon  and  mist,  rain  and  cloudy  weather, 

Light  on  the  budding  leaf,  dew  on  the  feather, 

Wind  on  the  open  hill,  bells  on  the  heather, 

Reeds  by  the  shady  pool,  lilies  on  the  water: 

Old  Tom  Bombadil  and  the  River-daughter! 

And  with  that  song  the  hobbits  stood  upon  the  threshold, 
and  a  golden  light  was  all  about  them. 


Chapter  7 


IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  TOM  BOMBADIL 


The  four  hobbits  stepped  over  the  wide  stone  threshold,  and 
stood  still,  blinking.  They  were  in  a  long  low  room,  filled  with 
the  light  of  lamps  swinging  from  the  beams  of  the  roof;  and 
on  the  table  of  dark  polished  wood  stood  many  candles,  tall 
and  yellow,  burning  brightly. 

In  a  chair,  at  the  far  side  of  the  room  facing  the  outer 
door,  sat  a  woman.  Her  long  yellow  hair  rippled  down  her 
shoulders;  her  gown  was  green,  green  as  young  reeds,  shot 
with  silver  like  beads  of  dew;  and  her  belt  was  of  gold,  shaped 
like  a  chain  of  flag-lilies  set  with  the  pale-blue  eyes  of  forget- 
me-nots.  About  her  feet  in  wide  vessels  of  green  and  brown 
earthenware,  white  water-lilies  were  floating,  so  that  she 
seemed  to  be  enthroned  in  the  midst  of  a  pool. 

‘Enter,  good  guests!’  she  said,  and  as  she  spoke  they  knew 
that  it  was  her  clear  voice  they  had  heard  singing.  They  came 
a  few  timid  steps  further  into  the  room,  and  began  to  bow 
low,  feeling  strangely  surprised  and  awkward,  like  folk  that, 
knocking  at  a  cottage  door  to  beg  for  a  drink  of  water,  have 
been  answered  by  a  fair  young  elf-queen  clad  in  living 
flowers.  But  before  they  could  say  anything,  she  sprang  lightly 
up  and  over  the  lily-bowls,  and  ran  laughing  towards  them; 
and  as  she  ran  her  gown  rustled  softly  like  the  wind  in  the 
flowering  borders  of  a  river. 

‘Come  dear  folk!  ’  she  said,  taking  Frodo  by  the  hand .  ‘Laugh 
and  be  merry!  I  am  Goldberry,  daughter  of  the  River.’  Then 
lightly  she  passed  them  and  closing  the  door  she  turned  her 
back  to  it,  with  her  white  arms  spread  out  across  it.  ‘Let  us  shut 
out  the  night!’  she  said.  ‘For  you  are  still  afraid,  perhaps,  of  mist 
and  tree-shadows  and  deep  water,  and  untame  things.  Fear 
nothing!  For  tonight  you  are  under  the  roof  of  T om  Bombadil.  ’ 


i62 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


The  hobbits  looked  at  her  in  wonder;  and  she  looked  at 
each  of  them  and  smiled.  ‘Fair  lady  Goldberry!’  said  Frodo 
at  last,  feeling  his  heart  moved  with  a  joy  that  he  did  not 
understand.  He  stood  as  he  had  at  times  stood  enchanted  by 
fair  elven-voices;  but  the  spell  that  was  now  laid  upon  him 
was  different:  less  keen  and  lofty  was  the  delight,  but  deeper 
and  nearer  to  mortal  heart;  marvellous  and  yet  not  strange. 
‘Fair  lady  Goldberry!’  he  said  again.  ‘Now  the  joy  that  was 
hidden  in  the  songs  we  heard  is  made  plain  to  me. 

O  slender  as  a  willow-wand!  O  clearer  than  clear  water! 

O  reed  by  the  living  pool!  Fair  River-daughter! 

O  spring-time  and  summer-time,  and  spring  again  after! 

O  wind  on  the  waterfall,  and  the  leaves’  laughter!’ 

Suddenly  he  stopped  and  stammered,  overcome  with  sur¬ 
prise  to  hear  himself  saying  such  things.  But  Goldberry 
laughed. 

‘Welcome!’  she  said.  ‘I  had  not  heard  that  folk  of  the  Shire 
were  so  sweet-tongued.  But  I  see  that  you  are  an  Elf-friend; 
the  light  in  your  eyes  and  the  ring  in  your  voice  tells  it.  This 
is  a  merry  meeting!  Sit  now,  and  wait  for  the  Master  of 
the  house!  He  will  not  be  long.  He  is  tending  your  Ured 
beasts.’ 

The  hobbits  sat  down  gladly  in  low  rush-seated  chairs, 
while  Goldberry  busied  herself  about  the  table;  and  their  eyes 
followed  her,  for  the  slender  grace  of  her  movement  filled 
them  with  quiet  delight.  From  somewhere  behind  the  house 
came  the  sound  of  singing.  Every  now  and  again  they  caught, 
among  many  a  derry  dol  and  a  merry  dol  and  a  ring  a  ding 
dillo  the  repeated  words: 

Old  Tom  Bombadil  is  a  merry  fellow; 

Bright  blue  his  jacket  is,  and  his  boots  are  yellow. 

‘Fair  lady!’  said  Frodo  again  after  a  while.  ‘Tell  me,  if  my 
asking  does  not  seem  foolish,  who  is  Tom  Bombadil?’ 


IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  TOM  BOMBADIL  163 

‘He  is,’  said  Goldberry,  staying  her  swift  movements  and 
smiling. 

Frodo  looked  at  her  questioningly.  ‘He  is,  as  you  have  seen 
him,’  she  said  in  answer  to  his  look.  ‘He  is  the  Master  of 
wood,  water,  and  hill.’ 

‘Then  all  this  strange  land  belongs  to  him?’ 

‘No  indeed!’  she  answered,  and  her  smile  faded.  ‘That 
would  indeed  be  a  burden,’  she  added  in  a  low  voice,  as  if  to 
herself.  ‘The  trees  and  the  grasses  and  all  things  growing  or 
living  in  the  land  belong  each  to  themselves.  Tom  Bombadil 
is  the  Master.  No  one  has  ever  caught  old  Tom  walking  in 
the  forest,  wading  in  the  water,  leaping  on  the  hill-tops  under 
light  and  shadow.  He  has  no  fear.  Tom  Bombadil  is  master.’ 

A  door  opened  and  in  came  Tom  Bombadil.  He  had  now 
no  hat  and  his  thick  brown  hair  was  crowned  with  autumn 
leaves.  He  laughed,  and  going  to  Goldberry,  took  her  hand. 

‘Here’s  my  pretty  lady!’  he  said,  bowing  to  the  hobbits. 
‘Here’s  my  Goldberry  clothed  all  in  silver-green  with  flowers 
in  her  girdle!  Is  the  table  laden?  I  see  yellow  cream  and 
honeycomb,  and  white  bread,  and  butter;  milk,  cheese,  and 
green  herbs  and  ripe  berries  gathered.  Is  that  enough  for  us? 
Is  the  supper  ready?’ 

‘It  is,’  said  Goldberry;  ‘but  the  guests  perhaps  are  not?’ 

Tom  clapped  his  hands  and  cried:  ‘Tom,  Tom!  your  guests 
are  tired,  and  you  had  near  forgotten!  Come  now,  my  merry 
friends,  and  Tom  will  refresh  you!  You  shall  clean  grimy 
hands,  and  wash  your  weary  faces;  cast  off  your  muddy 
cloaks  and  comb  out  your  tangles!’ 

He  opened  the  door,  and  they  followed  him  down  a  short 
passage  and  round  a  sharp  turn.  They  came  to  a  low  room 
with  a  sloping  roof  (a  penthouse,  it  seemed,  built  on  to  the 
north  end  of  the  house).  Its  walls  were  of  clean  stone,  but 
they  were  mostly  covered  with  green  hanging  mats  and  yellow 
curtains.  The  floor  was  flagged,  and  strewn  with  fresh  green 
rushes.  There  were  four  deep  mattresses,  each  piled  with 
white  blankets,  laid  on  the  floor  along  one  side.  Against  the 
opposite  wall  was  a  long  bench  laden  with  wide  earthenware 


164  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

basins,  and  beside  it  stood  brown  ewers  filled  with  water, 
some  cold,  some  steaming  hot.  There  were  soft  green  slippers 
set  ready  beside  each  bed. 

Before  long,  washed  and  refreshed,  the  hobbits  were  seated 
at  the  table,  two  on  each  side,  while  at  either  end  sat  Gold- 
berry  and  the  Master.  It  was  a  long  and  merry  meal.  Though 
the  hobbits  ate,  as  only  famished  hobbits  can  eat,  there  was 
no  lack.  The  drink  in  their  drinking-bowls  seemed  to  be  clear 
cold  water,  yet  it  went  to  their  hearts  like  wine  and  set  free 
their  voices.  The  guests  became  suddenly  aware  that  they 
were  singing  merrily,  as  if  it  was  easier  and  more  natural  than 
talking. 

At  last  Tom  and  Goldberry  rose  and  cleared  the  table 
swiftly.  The  guests  were  commanded  to  sit  quiet,  and  were 
set  in  chairs,  each  with  a  footstool  to  his  tired  feet.  There  was 
a  fire  in  the  wide  hearth  before  them,  and  it  was  burning 
with  a  sweet  smell,  as  if  it  were  built  of  apple-wood.  When 
everything  was  set  in  order,  all  the  lights  in  the  room  were 
put  out,  except  one  lamp  and  a  pair  of  candles  at  each  end 
of  the  chimney-shelf.  Then  Goldberry  came  and  stood  before 
them,  holding  a  candle;  and  she  wished  them  each  a  good 
night  and  deep  sleep. 

‘Have  peace  now,’  she  said,  ‘until  the  morning!  Heed  no 
nightly  noises!  For  nothing  passes  door  and  window  here 
save  moonlight  and  starlight  and  the  wind  off  the  hill-top. 
Good  night!’  She  passed  out  of  the  room  with  a  glimmer  and 
a  rustle.  The  sound  of  her  footsteps  was  like  a  stream  falling 
gently  away  downhill  over  cool  stones  in  the  quiet  of  night. 

Tom  sat  on  a  while  beside  them  in  silence,  while  each  of 
them  tried  to  muster  the  courage  to  ask  one  of  the  many 
questions  he  had  meant  to  ask  at  supper.  Sleep  gathered  on 
their  eyelids.  At  last  Frodo  spoke: 

‘Did  you  hear  me  calling,  Master,  or  was  it  just  chance  that 
brought  you  at  that  moment?’ 

Tom  stirred  like  a  man  shaken  out  of  a  pleasant  dream. 
‘Eh,  what?’  said  he.  ‘Did  I  hear  you  calling?  Nay,  I  did  not 


IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  TOM  BOMBADIL  165 

hear:  I  was  busy  singing.  Just  chance  brought  me  then,  if 
chance  you  call  it.  It  was  no  plan  of  mine,  though  I  was 
waiting  for  you.  We  heard  news  of  you,  and  learned  that  you 
were  wandering.  We  guessed  you’d  come  ere  long  down  to 
the  water:  all  paths  lead  that  way,  down  to  Withywindle.  Old 
grey  Willow-man,  he’s  a  mighty  singer;  and  it’s  hard  for  little 
folic  to  escape  his  cunning  mazes.  But  Tom  had  an  errand 
there,  that  he  dared  not  hinder.’  Tom  nodded  as  if  sleep  was 
taking  him  again;  but  he  went  on  in  a  soft  singing  voice: 

I  had  an  errand  there:  gathering  water-lilies, 
green  leaves  and  lilies  white  to  please  my  pretty  lady, 
the  last  ere  the  year’s  end  to  keep  them  from  the  winter, 
to  flower  by  her  pretty  feet  till  the  snows  are  melted. 

Each  year  at  summer’s  end  I  go  to  find  them  for  her, 
in  a  wide  pool,  deep  and  clear,  far  down  Withywindle; 
there  they  open  first  in  spring  and  there  they  linger  latest. 

By  that  pool  long  ago  I  found  the  River-daughter, 
fair  young  Goldberry  sitting  in  the  rushes. 

Sweet  was  her  singing  then,  and  her  heart  was  beating! 

He  opened  his  eyes  and  looked  at  them  with  a  sudden  glint 
of  blue: 

And  that  proved  well  for  you  -  for  now  I  shall  no  longer 
go  down  deep  again  along  the  forest-water, 
not  while  the  year  is  old.  Nor  shall  I  be  passing 
Old  Man  Willow’s  house  this  side  of  spring-time, 
not  till  the  merry  spring,  when  the  River-daughter 
dances  down  the  withy-path  to  bathe  in  the  water. 

He  fell  silent  again;  but  Frodo  could  not  help  asking  one 
more  question:  the  one  he  most  desired  to  have  answered. 
‘Tell  us,  Master,’  he  said,  ‘about  the  Willow-man.  What  is 
he?  I  have  never  heard  of  him  before.’ 

‘No,  don’t!’  said  Merry  and  Pippin  together,  sitting  sud¬ 
denly  upright.  ‘Not  now!  Not  until  the  morning!’ 


i66 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘That  is  right!’  said  the  old  man.  ‘Now  is  the  time  for 
resting.  Some  things  are  ill  to  hear  when  the  world’s  in 
shadow.  Sleep  till  the  morning-light,  rest  on  the  pillow!  Heed 
no  nightly  noise!  Fear  no  grey  willow!’  And  with  that  he  took 
down  the  lamp  and  blew  it  out,  and  grasping  a  candle  in 
either  hand  he  led  them  out  of  the  room. 

Their  mattresses  and  pillows  were  soft  as  down,  and  the 
blankets  were  of  white  wool.  They  had  hardly  laid  themselves 
on  the  deep  beds  and  drawn  the  light  covers  over  them  before 
they  were  asleep. 

In  the  dead  night,  Frodo  lay  in  a  dream  without  light.  Then 
he  saw  the  young  moon  rising;  under  its  thin  light  there 
loomed  before  him  a  black  wall  of  rock,  pierced  by  a  dark 
arch  like  a  great  gate.  It  seemed  to  Frodo  that  he  was  lifted 
up,  and  passing  over  he  saw  that  the  rock-wall  was  a  circle 
of  hills,  and  that  within  it  was  a  plain,  and  in  the  midst  of  the 
plain  stood  a  pinnacle  of  stone,  like  a  vast  tower  but  not  made 
by  hands.  On  its  top  stood  the  figure  of  a  man.  The  moon  as 
it  rose  seemed  to  hang  for  a  moment  above  his  head  and 
glistened  in  his  white  hair  as  the  wind  stirred  it.  Up  from  the 
dark  plain  below  came  the  crying  of  fell  voices,  and  the  howl¬ 
ing  of  many  wolves.  Suddenly  a  shadow,  like  the  shape  of 
great  wings,  passed  across  the  moon.  The  figure  lifted  his 
arms  and  a  light  flashed  from  the  staff  that  he  wielded.  A 
mighty  eagle  swept  down  and  bore  him  away.  The  voices 
wailed  and  the  wolves  yammered.  There  was  a  noise  like  a 
strong  wind  blowing,  and  on  it  was  borne  the  sound  of  hoofs, 
galloping,  galloping,  galloping  from  the  East.  ‘Black  Riders!’ 
thought  Frodo  as  he  wakened,  with  the  sound  of  the  hoofs 
still  echoing  in  his  mind.  He  wondered  if  he  would  ever  again 
have  the  courage  to  leave  the  safety  of  these  stone  walls.  He 
lay  motionless,  still  listening;  but  all  was  now  silent,  and  at 
last  he  turned  and  fell  asleep  again  or  wandered  into  some 
other  unremembered  dream. 

At  his  side  Pippin  lay  dreaming  pleasantly;  but  a  change 
came  over  his  dreams  and  he  turned  and  groaned.  Suddenly 


IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  TOM  BOMBADIL  167 

he  woke,  or  thought  he  had  waked,  and  yet  still  heard  in  the 
darkness  the  sound  that  had  disturbed  his  dream:  tip-tap, 
squeak',  the  noise  was  like  branches  fretting  in  the  wind, 
twig-fingers  scraping  wall  and  window:  creak,  creak,  creak. 
He  wondered  if  there  were  willow-trees  close  to  the  house; 
and  then  suddenly  he  had  a  dreadful  feeling  that  he  was  not 
in  an  ordinary  house  at  all,  but  inside  the  willow  and  listening 
to  that  horrible  dry  creaking  voice  laughing  at  him  again.  He 
sat  up,  and  felt  the  soft  pillows  yield  to  his  hands,  and  he  lay 
down  again  relieved.  He  seemed  to  hear  the  echo  of  words 
in  his  ears:  ‘Fear  nothing!  Have  peace  until  the  morning! 
Heed  no  nightly  noises!’  Then  he  went  to  sleep  again. 

It  was  the  sound  of  water  that  Merry  heard  falling  into  his 
quiet  sleep:  water  streaming  down  gently,  and  then  spreading, 
spreading  irresistibly  all  round  the  house  into  a  dark  shoreless 
pool.  It  gurgled  under  the  walls,  and  was  rising  slowly  but 
surely.  ‘I  shall  be  drowned!’  he  thought.  ‘It  will  find  its  way 
in,  and  then  I  shall  drown.’  He  felt  that  he  was  lying  in  a  soft 
slimy  bog,  and  springing  up  he  set  his  foot  on  the  corner  of 
a  cold  hard  flagstone.  Then  he  remembered  where  he  was 
and  lay  down  again.  He  seemed  to  hear  or  remember  hearing: 
‘Nothing  passes  doors  or  windows  save  moonlight  and  star¬ 
light  and  the  wind  off  the  hill -top.’  A  little  breath  of  sweet  air 
moved  the  curtain.  He  breathed  deep  and  fell  asleep  again. 

As  far  as  he  could  remember,  Sam  slept  through  the  night 
in  deep  content,  if  logs  are  contented. 

They  woke  up,  all  four  at  once,  in  the  morning  light.  Tom 
was  moving  about  the  room  whistling  like  a  starling.  When 
he  heard  them  stir  he  clapped  his  hands,  and  cried:  ‘Hey! 
Come  merry  dol!  derry  dol!  My  hearties!’  He  drew  back  the 
yellow  curtains,  and  the  hobbits  saw  that  these  had  covered 
the  windows,  at  either  end  of  the  room,  one  looking  east  and 
the  other  looking  west. 

They  leapt  up  refreshed.  Frodo  ran  to  the  eastern  window, 
and  found  himself  looking  into  a  kitchen-garden  grey  with 
dew.  He  had  half  expected  to  see  turf  right  up  to  the  walls, 


i68 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


turf  all  pocked  with  hoof-prints.  Actually  his  view  was 
screened  by  a  tall  line  of  beans  on  poles;  but  above  and  far 
beyond  them  the  grey  top  of  the  hill  loomed  up  against  the 
sunrise.  It  was  a  pale  morning:  in  the  East,  behind  long  clouds 
like  lines  of  soiled  wool  stained  red  at  the  edges,  lay  glimmer¬ 
ing  deeps  of  yellow.  The  sky  spoke  of  rain  to  come;  but  the 
light  was  broadening  quickly,  and  the  red  flowers  on  the 
beans  began  to  glow  against  the  wet  green  leaves. 

Pippin  looked  out  of  the  western  window,  down  into  a  pool 
of  mist.  The  Forest  was  hidden  under  a  fog.  It  was  like 
looking  down  on  to  a  sloping  cloud-roof  from  above.  There 
was  a  fold  or  channel  where  the  mist  was  broken  into  many 
plumes  and  billows:  the  valley  of  the  Withywindle.  The 
stream  ran  down  the  hill  on  the  left  and  vanished  into  the 
white  shadows.  Near  at  hand  was  a  flower-garden  and  a 
clipped  hedge  silver-netted,  and  beyond  that  grey  shaven 
grass  pale  with  dew-drops.  There  was  no  willow-tree  to  be 
seen. 

‘Good  morning,  merry  friends!’  cried  Tom,  opening  the 
eastern  window  wide.  A  cool  air  flowed  in;  it  had  a  rainy 
smell.  ‘Sun  won’t  show  her  face  much  today,  I’m  thinking.  I 
have  been  walking  wide,  leaping  on  the  hill-tops,  since  the 
grey  dawn  began,  nosing  wind  and  weather,  wet  grass  under¬ 
foot,  wet  sky  above  me.  I  wakened  Goldberry  singing 
under  window;  but  naught  wakes  hobbit-folk  in  the  early 
morning.  In  the  night  little  folk  wake  up  in  the  darkness,  and 
sleep  after  light  has  come!  Ring  a  ding  dillo!  Wake  now,  my 
merry  friends!  Forget  the  nightly  noises!  Ring  a  ding  dillo 
del!  derry  del,  my  hearties!  If  you  come  soon  you’ll  find 
breakfast  on  the  table.  If  you  come  late  you’ll  get  grass  and 
rain-water!’ 

Needless  to  say  -  not  that  Tom’s  threat  sounded  very 
serious  -  the  hobbits  came  soon,  and  left  the  table  late  and 
only  when  it  was  beginning  to  look  rather  empty.  Neither 
Tom  nor  Goldberry  were  there.  Tom  could  be  heard  about 
the  house,  clattering  in  the  kitchen,  and  up  and  down  the 
stairs,  and  singing  here  and  there  outside.  The  room  looked 


IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  TOM  BOMBADIL  169 

westward  over  the  mist-clouded  valley,  and  the  window  was 
open.  Water  dripped  down  from  the  thatched  eaves  above. 
Before  they  had  finished  breakfast  the  clouds  had  joined  into 
an  unbroken  roof,  and  a  straight  grey  rain  came  softly  and 
steadily  down.  Behind  its  deep  curtain  the  Forest  was  com¬ 
pletely  veiled. 

As  they  looked  out  of  the  window  there  came  falling  gently 
as  if  it  was  flowing  down  the  rain  out  of  the  sky,  the  clear 
voice  of  Goldberry  singing  up  above  them.  They  could  hear 
few  words,  but  it  seemed  plain  to  them  that  the  song  was  a 
rain-song,  as  sweet  as  showers  on  dry  hills,  that  told  the  tale 
of  a  river  from  the  spring  in  the  highlands  to  the  Sea  far 
below.  The  hobbits  listened  with  delight;  and  Frodo  was  glad 
in  his  heart,  and  blessed  the  kindly  weather,  because  it 
delayed  them  from  departing.  The  thought  of  going  had  been 
heavy  upon  him  from  the  moment  he  awoke;  but  he  guessed 
now  that  they  would  not  go  further  that  day. 

The  upper  wind  settled  in  the  West  and  deeper  and  wetter 
clouds  rolled  up  to  spill  their  laden  rain  on  the  bare  heads  of 
the  Downs.  Nothing  could  be  seen  all  round  the  house  but 
falling  water.  Frodo  stood  near  the  open  door  and  watched 
the  white  chalky  path  turn  into  a  little  river  of  milk  and  go 
bubbling  away  down  into  the  valley.  Tom  Bombadil  came 
trotting  round  the  corner  of  the  house,  waving  his  arms  as  if 
he  was  warding  off  the  rain  -  and  indeed  when  he  sprang 
over  the  threshold  he  seemed  quite  dry,  except  for  his  boots. 
These  he  took  off  and  put  in  the  chimney-corner.  Then  he 
sat  in  the  largest  chair  and  called  the  hobbits  to  gather  round 
him. 

‘This  is  Goldberry’s  washing  day,’  he  said,  ‘and  her 
autumn-cleaning.  Too  wet  for  hobbit-folk  -  let  them  rest 
while  they  are  able!  It’s  a  good  day  for  long  tales,  for  questions 
and  for  answers,  so  Tom  will  start  the  talking.’ 

He  then  told  them  many  remarkable  stories,  sometimes 
half  as  if  speaking  to  himself,  sometimes  looking  at  them 
suddenly  with  a  bright  blue  eye  under  his  deep  brows.  Often 


170  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

his  voice  would  turn  to  song,  and  he  would  get  out  of  his 
chair  and  dance  about.  He  told  them  tales  of  bees  and  flowers, 
the  ways  of  trees,  and  the  strange  creatures  of  the  Forest, 
about  the  evil  things  and  good  things,  things  friendly  and 
things  unfriendly,  cruel  things  and  kind  things,  and  secrets 
hidden  under  brambles. 

As  they  listened,  they  began  to  understand  the  lives  of  the 
Forest,  apart  from  themselves,  indeed  to  feel  themselves  as 
the  strangers  where  all  other  things  were  at  home.  Moving 
constantly  in  and  out  of  his  talk  was  Old  Man  Willow,  and 
Frodo  learned  now  enough  to  content  him,  indeed  more  than 
enough,  for  it  was  not  comfortable  lore.  Tom’s  words  laid 
bare  the  hearts  of  trees  and  their  thoughts,  which  were  often 
dark  and  strange,  and  filled  with  a  hatred  of  things  that  go  free 
upon  the  earth,  gnawing,  biting,  breaking,  hacking,  burning: 
destroyers  and  usurpers.  It  was  not  called  the  Old  Forest 
without  reason,  for  it  was  indeed  ancient,  a  survivor  of  vast 
forgotten  woods;  and  in  it  there  lived  yet,  ageing  no  quicker 
than  the  hills,  the  fathers  of  the  fathers  of  trees,  remembering 
times  when  they  were  lords.  The  countless  years  had  filled 
them  with  pride  and  rooted  wisdom,  and  with  malice.  But 
none  were  more  dangerous  than  the  Great  Willow:  his  heart 
was  rotten,  but  his  strength  was  green;  and  he  was  cunning, 
and  a  master  of  winds,  and  his  song  and  thought  ran  through 
the  woods  on  both  sides  of  the  river.  His  grey  thirsty  spirit 
drew  power  out  of  the  earth  and  spread  like  fine  root-threads 
in  the  ground,  and  invisible  twig-fingers  in  the  air,  till  it  had 
under  its  dominion  nearly  all  the  trees  of  the  Forest  from  the 
Hedge  to  the  Downs. 

Suddenly  Tom’s  talk  left  the  woods  and  went  leaping  up 
the  young  stream,  over  bubbling  waterfalls,  over  pebbles  and 
worn  rocks,  and  among  small  flowers  in  close  grass  and  wet 
crannies,  wandering  at  last  up  on  to  the  Downs.  They  heard 
of  the  Great  Barrows,  and  the  green  mounds,  and  the  stone- 
rings  upon  the  hills  and  in  the  hollows  among  the  hills.  Sheep 
were  bleating  in  flocks.  Green  walls  and  white  walls  rose. 
There  were  fortresses  on  the  heights.  Kings  of  little  kingdoms 


IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  TOM  BOMBADIL  171 

fought  together,  and  the  young  Sun  shone  like  fire  on  the  red 
metal  of  their  new  and  greedy  swords.  There  was  victory  and 
defeat;  and  towers  fell,  fortresses  were  burned,  and  flames 
went  up  into  the  sky.  Gold  was  piled  on  the  biers  of  dead 
kings  and  queens;  and  mounds  covered  them,  and  the  stone 
doors  were  shut;  and  the  grass  grew  over  all.  Sheep  walked 
for  a  while  biting  the  grass,  but  soon  the  hills  were  empty 
again.  A  shadow  came  out  of  dark  places  far  away,  and  the 
bones  were  stirred  in  the  mounds.  Barrow-wights  walked  in 
the  hollow  places  with  a  clinic  of  rings  on  cold  fingers,  and 
gold  chains  in  the  wind.  Stone  rings  grinned  out  of  the  ground 
like  broken  teeth  in  the  moonlight. 

The  hobbits  shuddered.  Even  in  the  Shire  the  rumour  of 
the  Barrow-wights  of  the  Barrow-downs  beyond  the  Forest 
had  been  heard.  But  it  was  not  a  tale  that  any  hobbit  liked  to 
listen  to,  even  by  a  comfortable  fireside  far  away.  These  four 
now  suddenly  remembered  what  the  joy  of  this  house  had 
driven  from  their  minds:  the  house  of  Tom  Bombadil  nestled 
under  the  very  shoulder  of  those  dreaded  hills.  They  lost  the 
thread  of  his  tale  and  shifted  uneasily,  looking  aside  at  one 
another. 

When  they  caught  his  words  again  they  found  that  he  had 
now  wandered  into  strange  regions  beyond  their  memory  and 
beyond  their  waking  thought,  into  times  when  the  world  was 
wider,  and  the  seas  flowed  straight  to  the  western  Shore;  and 
still  on  and  back  Tom  went  singing  out  into  ancient  starlight, 
when  only  the  Elf-sires  were  awake.  Then  suddenly  he 
stopped,  and  they  saw  that  he  nodded  as  if  he  was  falling 
asleep.  The  hobbits  sat  still  before  him,  enchanted;  and  it 
seemed  as  if,  under  the  spell  of  his  words,  the  wind  had 
gone,  and  the  clouds  had  dried  up,  and  the  day  had  been 
withdrawn,  and  darkness  had  come  from  East  and  West,  and 
all  the  sky  was  filled  with  the  light  of  white  stars. 

Whether  the  morning  and  evening  of  one  day  or  of  many 
days  had  passed  Frodo  could  not  tell.  He  did  not  feel  either 
hungry  or  tired,  only  filled  with  wonder.  The  stars  shone 
through  the  window  and  the  silence  of  the  heavens  seemed 


172 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


to  be  round  him.  He  spoke  at  last  out  of  his  wonder  and  a 
sudden  fear  of  that  silence: 

‘Who  are  you,  Master?’  he  asked. 

‘Eh,  what?’  said  Tom  sitting  up,  and  his  eyes  glinting  in 
the  gloom.  ‘Don’t  you  know  my  name  yet?  That’s  the  only 
answer.  Tell  me,  who  are  you,  alone,  yourself  and  nameless? 
But  you  are  young  and  I  am  old.  Eldest,  that’s  what  I  am. 
Mark  my  words,  my  friends:  Tom  was  here  before  the  river 
and  the  trees;  Tom  remembers  the  first  raindrop  and  the  first 
acorn.  He  made  paths  before  the  Big  People,  and  saw  the 
little  People  arriving.  He  was  here  before  the  Kings  and  the 
graves  and  the  Barrow- wights.  When  the  Elves  passed  west¬ 
ward,  Tom  was  here  already,  before  the  seas  were  bent.  He 
knew  the  dark  under  the  stars  when  it  was  fearless  -  before 
the  Dark  Lord  came  from  Outside.’ 

A  shadow  seemed  to  pass  by  the  window,  and  the  hobbits 
glanced  hastily  through  the  panes.  When  they  turned  again, 
Goldberry  stood  in  the  door  behind,  framed  in  light.  She  held 
a  candle,  shielding  its  flame  from  the  draught  with  her  hand; 
and  the  light  flowed  through  it,  like  sunlight  through  a  white 
shell. 

‘The  rain  has  ended,’  she  said;  ‘and  new  waters  are  running 
downhill,  under  the  stars.  Let  us  now  laugh  and  be  glad!’ 

‘And  let  us  have  food  and  drink!’  cried  Tom.  ‘Long  tales 
are  thirsty.  And  long  listening’s  hungry  work,  morning,  noon, 
and  evening!’  With  that  he  jumped  out  of  his  chair,  and  with 
a  bound  took  a  candle  from  the  chimney-shelf  and  lit  it  in 
the  flame  that  Goldberry  held;  then  he  danced  about  the 
table.  Suddenly  he  hopped  through  the  door  and  dis¬ 
appeared. 

Quickly  he  returned,  bearing  a  large  and  laden  tray.  Then 
Tom  and  Goldberry  set  the  table;  and  the  hobbits  sat  half  in 
wonder  and  half  in  laughter:  so  fair  was  the  grace  of  Gold¬ 
berry  and  so  merry  and  odd  the  caperings  of  Tom.  Yet  in 
some  fashion  they  seemed  to  weave  a  single  dance,  neither 
hindering  the  other,  in  and  out  of  the  room,  and  round  about 
the  table;  and  with  great  speed  food  and  vessels  and  lights 


IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  TOM  BOMBADIL  1 73 

were  set  in  order.  The  boards  blazed  with  candles,  white  and 
yellow.  Tom  bowed  to  his  guests.  ‘Supper  is  ready,’  said 
Goldberry;  and  now  the  hobbits  saw  that  she  was  clothed  all 
in  silver  with  a  white  girdle,  and  her  shoes  were  like  fishes’ 
mail.  But  Tom  was  all  in  clean  blue,  blue  as  rain-washed 
forget-me-nots,  and  he  had  green  stockings. 

It  was  a  supper  even  better  than  before.  The  hobbits  under 
the  spell  of  Tom’s  words  may  have  missed  one  meal  or  many, 
but  when  the  food  was  before  them  it  seemed  at  least  a  week 
since  they  had  eaten.  They  did  not  sing  or  even  speak  much 
for  a  while,  and  paid  close  attention  to  business.  But  after  a 
time  their  hearts  and  spirits  rose  high  again,  and  their  voices 
rang  out  in  mirth  and  laughter. 

After  they  had  eaten,  Goldberry  sang  many  songs  for  them, 
songs  that  began  merrily  in  the  hills  and  fell  softly  down  into 
silence;  and  in  the  silences  they  saw  in  their  minds  pools  and 
waters  wider  than  any  they  had  known,  and  looking  into  them 
they  saw  the  sky  below  them  and  the  stars  like  jewels  in  the 
depths.  Then  once  more  she  wished  them  each  good  night 
and  left  them  by  the  fireside.  But  Tom  now  seemed  wide 
awake  and  plied  them  with  questions. 

He  appeared  already  to  know  much  about  them  and  all 
their  families,  and  indeed  to  know  much  of  all  the  history 
and  doings  of  the  Shire  down  from  days  hardly  remembered 
among  the  hobbits  themselves.  It  no  longer  surprised  them; 
but  he  made  no  secret  that  he  owed  his  recent  knowledge 
largely  to  Farmer  Maggot,  whom  he  seemed  to  regard  as  a 
person  of  more  importance  than  they  had  imagined.  ‘There’s 
earth  under  his  old  feet,  and  clay  on  his  fingers;  wisdom  in 
his  bones,  and  both  his  eyes  are  open,’  said  Tom.  It  was  also 
clear  that  Tom  had  dealings  with  the  Elves,  and  it  seemed 
that  in  some  fashion,  news  had  reached  him  from  Gildor 
concerning  the  flight  of  Frodo. 

Indeed  so  much  did  Tom  know,  and  so  cunning  was  his 
questioning,  that  Frodo  found  himself  telling  him  more  about 
Bilbo  and  his  own  hopes  and  fears  than  he  had  told  before 


174 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


even  to  Gandalf.  Tom  wagged  his  head  up  and  down,  and 
there  was  a  glint  in  his  eyes  when  he  heard  of  the  Riders. 

‘Show  me  the  precious  Ring!’  he  said  suddenly  in  the  midst 
of  the  story:  and  Frodo,  to  his  own  astonishment,  drew  out 
the  chain  from  his  pocket,  and  unfastening  the  Ring  handed 
it  at  once  to  Tom. 

It  seemed  to  grow  larger  as  it  lay  for  a  moment  on  his  big 
brown-skinned  hand.  Then  suddenly  he  put  it  to  his  eye  and 
laughed.  For  a  second  the  hobbits  had  a  vision,  both  comical 
and  alarming,  of  his  bright  blue  eye  gleaming  through  a  circle 
of  gold.  Then  Tom  put  the  Ring  round  the  end  of  his  little 
finger  and  held  it  up  to  the  candlelight.  For  a  moment 
the  hobbits  noticed  nothing  strange  about  this.  Then  they 
gasped.  There  was  no  sign  of  Tom  disappearing! 

Tom  laughed  again,  and  then  he  spun  the  Ring  in  the  air 
-  and  it  vanished  with  a  flash.  Frodo  gave  a  cry  -  and  Tom 
leaned  forward  and  handed  it  back  to  him  with  a  smile. 

Frodo  looked  at  it  closely,  and  rather  suspiciously  (like  one 
who  has  lent  a  trinket  to  a  juggler) .  It  was  the  same  Ring,  or 
looked  the  same  and  weighed  the  same:  for  that  Ring  had 
always  seemed  to  Frodo  to  weigh  strangely  heavy  in  the  hand. 
But  something  prompted  him  to  make  sure.  He  was  perhaps 
a  trifle  annoyed  with  Tom  for  seeming  to  make  so  light  of 
what  even  Gandalf  thought  so  perilously  important.  He 
waited  for  an  opportunity,  when  the  talk  was  going  again, 
and  Tom  was  telling  an  absurd  story  about  badgers  and  their 
queer  ways  -  then  he  slipped  the  Ring  on. 

Merry  turned  towards  him  to  say  something  and  gave  a 
start,  and  checked  an  exclamation.  Frodo  was  delighted  (in 
a  way):  it  was  his  own  ring  all  right,  for  Merry  was  staring 
blankly  at  his  chair,  and  obviously  could  not  see  him.  He  got 
up  and  crept  quietly  away  from  the  fireside  towards  the  outer 
door. 

‘Hey  there!’  cried  Tom,  glancing  towards  him  with  a  most 
seeing  look  in  his  shining  eyes.  ‘Hey!  Come  Frodo,  there! 
Where  be  you  a-going?  Old  Tom  Bombadil’s  not  as  blind  as 
that  yet.  Take  off  your  golden  ring!  Your  hand’s  more  fair 


IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  TOM  BOMBADIL  1 75 

without  it.  Come  back!  Leave  your  game  and  sit  down  beside 
me!  We  must  talk  a  while  more,  and  think  about  the  morning. 
Tom  must  teach  the  right  road,  and  keep  your  feet  from 
wandering.’ 

Frodo  laughed  (trying  to  feel  pleased),  and  taking  off  the 
Ring  he  came  and  sat  down  again.  Tom  now  told  them  that 
he  reckoned  the  Sun  would  shine  tomorrow,  and  it  would  be 
a  glad  morning,  and  setting  out  would  be  hopeful.  But  they 
would  do  well  to  start  early;  for  weather  in  that  country  was 
a  thing  that  even  Tom  could  not  be  sure  of  for  long,  and  it 
would  change  sometimes  quicker  than  he  could  change  his 
jacket.  ‘I  am  no  weather-master,’  said  he;  ‘nor  is  aught  that 
goes  on  two  legs.’ 

By  his  advice  they  decided  to  make  nearly  due  North  from 
his  house,  over  the  western  and  lower  slopes  of  the  Downs: 
they  might  hope  in  that  way  to  strike  the  East  Road  in  a  day’s 
journey,  and  avoid  the  Barrows.  He  told  them  not  to  be  afraid 
-  but  to  mind  their  own  business. 

‘Keep  to  the  green  grass.  Don’t  you  go  a-meddling  with 
old  stone  or  cold  Wights  or  prying  in  their  houses,  unless  you 
be  strong  folic  with  hearts  that  never  falter!’  He  said  this  more 
than  once;  and  he  advised  them  to  pass  barrows  by  on  the 
west-side,  if  they  chanced  to  stray  near  one.  Then  he  taught 
them  a  rhyme  to  sing,  if  they  should  by  ill-luck  fall  into  any 
danger  or  difficulty  the  next  day. 

Ho!  Tom  Bombadil,  Tom  Bombadillo! 

By  water,  wood  and  hill,  by  the  reed  and  willow, 

By  fire,  sun  and  moon,  harken  now  and  hear  us! 

Come,  Tom  Bombadil,  for  our  need  is  near  us! 

When  they  had  sung  this  altogether  after  him,  he  clapped 
them  each  on  the  shoulder  with  a  laugh,  and  taking  candles 
led  them  back  to  their  bedroom. 


Chapter  8 


FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS 


That  night  they  heard  no  noises.  But  either  in  his  dreams  or 
out  of  them,  he  could  not  tell  which,  Frodo  heard  a  sweet 
singing  running  in  his  mind:  a  song  that  seemed  to  come  like 
a  pale  light  behind  a  grey  rain-curtain,  and  growing  stronger 
to  turn  the  veil  all  to  glass  and  silver,  until  at  last  it  was  rolled 
back,  and  a  far  green  country  opened  before  him  under  a 
swift  sunrise. 

The  vision  melted  into  waking;  and  there  was  Tom  whist¬ 
ling  like  a  tree-full  of  birds;  and  the  sun  was  already  slanting 
down  the  hill  and  through  the  open  window.  Outside  every¬ 
thing  was  green  and  pale  gold. 

After  breakfast,  which  they  again  ate  alone,  they  made 
ready  to  say  farewell,  as  nearly  heavy  of  heart  as  was  possible 
on  such  a  morning:  cool,  bright,  and  clean  under  a  washed 
autumn  sky  of  thin  blue.  The  air  came  fresh  from  the  North¬ 
west.  Their  quiet  ponies  were  almost  frisky,  sniffing  and 
moving  restlessly.  Tom  came  out  of  the  house  and  waved  his 
hat  and  danced  upon  the  doorstep,  bidding  the  hobbits  to 
get  up  and  be  off  and  go  with  good  speed. 

They  rode  off  along  a  path  that  wound  away  from  behind 
the  house,  and  went  slanting  up  towards  the  north  end  of  the 
hill-brow  under  which  it  sheltered.  They  had  just  dismounted 
to  lead  their  ponies  up  the  last  steep  slope,  when  suddenly 
Frodo  stopped. 

‘Goldberry!’  he  cried.  ‘My  fair  lady,  clad  all  in  silver  green! 
We  have  never  said  farewell  to  her,  nor  seen  her  since  the 
evening!’  He  was  so  distressed  that  he  turned  back;  but  at 
that  moment  a  clear  call  came  rippling  down.  There  on  the 
hill-brow  she  stood  beckoning  to  them:  her  hair  was  flying 
loose,  and  as  it  caught  the  sun  it  shone  and  shimmered.  A 


FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS  177 

light  like  the  glint  of  water  on  dewy  grass  flashed  from  under 
her  feet  as  she  danced. 

They  hastened  up  the  last  slope,  and  stood  breathless 
beside  her.  They  bowed,  but  with  a  wave  of  her  arm  she  bade 
them  look  round;  and  they  looked  out  from  the  hill-top  over 
lands  under  the  morning.  It  was  now  as  clear  and  far-seen  as 
it  had  been  veiled  and  misty  when  they  stood  upon  the  knoll 
in  the  Forest,  which  could  now  be  seen  rising  pale  and  green 
out  of  the  dark  trees  in  the  West.  In  that  direction  the  land 
rose  in  wooded  ridges,  green,  yellow,  russet  under  the  sun, 
beyond  which  lay  hidden  the  valley  of  the  Brandywine.  To 
the  South,  over  the  line  of  the  Withywindle,  there  was  a 
distant  glint  like  pale  glass  where  the  Brandywine  River  made 
a  great  loop  in  the  lowlands  and  flowed  away  out  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  hobbits.  Northward  beyond  the  dwindling 
downs  the  land  ran  away  in  flats  and  swellings  of  grey  and 
green  and  pale  earth-colours,  until  it  faded  into  a  featureless 
and  shadowy  distance.  Eastward  the  Barrow-downs  rose, 
ridge  behind  ridge  into  the  morning,  and  vanished  out  of 
eyesight  into  a  guess:  it  was  no  more  than  a  guess  of  blue  and 
a  remote  white  glimmer  blending  with  the  hem  of  the  sky, 
but  it  spoke  to  them,  out  of  memory  and  old  tales,  of  the 
high  and  distant  mountains. 

They  took  a  deep  draught  of  the  air,  and  felt  that  a  skip  and 
a  few  stout  strides  would  bear  them  wherever  they  wished.  It 
seemed  fainthearted  to  go  jogging  aside  over  the  crumpled 
skirts  of  the  downs  towards  the  Road,  when  they  should  be 
leaping,  as  lusty  as  Tom,  over  the  stepping  stones  of  the  hills 
straight  towards  the  Mountains. 

Goldberry  spoke  to  them  and  recalled  their  eyes  and 
thoughts.  ‘Speed  now,  fair  guests!’  she  said.  ‘And  hold  to 
your  purpose!  North  with  the  wind  in  the  left  eye  and  a 
blessing  on  your  footsteps!  Make  haste  while  the  Sun  shines!’ 
And  to  Frodo  she  said:  ‘Farewell,  Elf-friend,  it  was  a  merry 
meeting!’ 

But  Frodo  found  no  words  to  answer.  He  bowed  low,  and 
mounted  his  pony,  and  followed  by  his  friends  jogged  slowly 


178 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


down  the  gentle  slope  behind  the  hill.  Tom  Bombadil’s  house 
and  the  valley,  and  the  Forest  were  lost  to  view.  The  air  grew 
warmer  between  the  green  walls  of  hillside  and  hillside,  and 
the  scent  of  turf  rose  strong  and  sweet  as  they  breathed. 
Turning  back,  when  they  reached  the  bottom  of  the  green 
hollow,  they  saw  Goldberry,  now  small  and  slender  like  a 
sunlit  flower  against  the  sky:  she  was  standing  still  watching 
them,  and  her  hands  were  stretched  out  towards  them.  As 
they  looked  she  gave  a  clear  call,  and  lifting  up  her  hand  she 
turned  and  vanished  behind  the  hill. 

Their  way  wound  along  the  floor  of  the  hollow,  and  round 
the  green  feet  of  a  steep  hill  into  another  deeper  and  broader 
valley,  and  then  over  the  shoulders  of  further  hills,  and  down 
their  long  limbs,  and  up  their  smooth  sides  again,  up  on  to 
new  hill-tops  and  down  into  new  valleys.  There  was  no  tree 
nor  any  visible  water:  it  was  a  country  of  grass  and  short 
springy  turf,  silent  except  for  the  whisper  of  the  air  over  the 
edges  of  the  land,  and  high  lonely  cries  of  strange  birds.  As 
they  journeyed  the  sun  mounted,  and  grew  hot.  Each  time 
they  climbed  a  ridge  the  breeze  seemed  to  have  grown  less. 
When  they  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  country  westward  the 
distant  Forest  seemed  to  be  smoking,  as  if  the  fallen  rain  was 
steaming  up  again  from  leaf  and  root  and  mould.  A  shadow 
now  lay  round  the  edge  of  sight,  a  dark  haze  above  which  the 
upper  sky  was  like  a  blue  cap,  hot  and  heavy. 

About  mid-day  they  came  to  a  hill  whose  top  was  wide 
and  flattened,  like  a  shallow  saucer  with  a  green  mounded 
rim.  Inside  there  was  no  air  stirring,  and  the  sky  seemed  near 
their  heads.  They  rode  across  and  looked  northwards.  Then 
their  hearts  rose;  for  it  seemed  plain  that  they  had  come 
further  already  than  they  had  expected.  Certainly  the  dis¬ 
tances  had  now  all  become  hazy  and  deceptive,  but  there 
could  be  no  doubt  that  the  Downs  were  coming  to  an  end. 
A  long  valley  lay  below  them  winding  away  northwards,  until 
it  came  to  an  opening  between  two  steep  shoulders.  Beyond, 
there  seemed  to  be  no  more  hills.  Due  north  they  faintly 


FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS 


179 


glimpsed  a  long  dark  line.  ‘That  is  a  line  of  trees,’  said  Merry, 
‘and  that  must  mark  the  Road.  All  along  it  for  many  leagues 
east  of  the  Bridge  there  are  trees  growing.  Some  say  they 
were  planted  in  the  old  days.’ 

‘Splendid!’  said  Frodo.  ‘If  we  make  as  good  going  this 
afternoon  as  we  have  done  this  morning,  we  shall  have  left 
the  Downs  before  the  Sun  sets  and  be  jogging  on  in  search 
of  a  camping  place.’  But  even  as  he  spoke  he  turned  his 
glance  eastwards,  and  he  saw  that  on  that  side  the  hills  were 
higher  and  looked  down  upon  them;  and  all  those  hills  were 
crowned  with  green  mounds,  and  on  some  were  standing 
stones,  pointing  upwards  like  jagged  teeth  out  of  green  gums. 

That  view  was  somehow  disquieting;  so  they  turned  from 
the  sight  and  went  down  into  the  hollow  circle.  In  the  midst 
of  it  there  stood  a  single  stone,  standing  tall  under  the  sun 
above,  and  at  this  hour  casting  no  shadow.  It  was  shapeless 
and  yet  significant:  like  a  landmark,  or  a  guarding  finger,  or 
more  like  a  warning.  But  they  were  now  hungry,  and  the  sun 
was  still  at  the  fearless  noon;  so  they  set  their  backs  against 
the  east  side  of  the  stone.  It  was  cool,  as  if  the  sun  had  had 
no  power  to  warm  it;  but  at  that  time  this  seemed  pleasant. 
There  they  took  food  and  drink,  and  made  as  good  a  noon- 
meal  under  the  open  sky  as  anyone  could  wish;  for  the  food 
came  from  ‘down  under  Hill’.  Tom  had  provided  them  with 
plenty  for  the  comfort  of  the  day.  Their  ponies  unburdened 
strayed  upon  the  grass. 

Riding  over  the  hills,  and  eating  their  fill,  the  warm  sun 
and  the  scent  of  turf,  lying  a  little  too  long,  stretching  out 
their  legs  and  looking  at  the  sky  above  their  noses:  these 
things  are,  perhaps,  enough  to  explain  what  happened.  How¬ 
ever  that  may  be:  they  woke  suddenly  and  uncomfortably 
from  a  sleep  they  had  never  meant  to  take.  The  standing 
stone  was  cold,  and  it  cast  a  long  pale  shadow  that  stretched 
eastward  over  them.  The  sun,  a  pale  and  watery  yellow,  was 
gleaming  through  the  mist  just  above  the  west  wall  of  the 
hollow  in  which  they  lay;  north,  south,  and  east,  beyond  the 


i8o 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


wall  the  fog  was  thick,  cold  and  white.  The  air  was  silent, 
heavy  and  chill.  Their  ponies  were  standing  crowded  together 
with  their  heads  down. 

The  hobbits  sprang  to  their  feet  in  alarm,  and  ran  to  the 
western  rim.  They  found  that  they  were  upon  an  island  in 
the  fog.  Even  as  they  looked  out  in  dismay  towards  the  setting 
sun,  it  sank  before  their  eyes  into  a  white  sea,  and  a  cold  grey 
shadow  sprang  up  in  the  East  behind.  The  fog  rolled  up  to 
the  walls  and  rose  above  them,  and  as  it  mounted  it  bent  over 
their  heads  until  it  became  a  roof:  they  were  shut  in  a  hall  of 
mist  whose  central  pillar  was  the  standing  stone. 

They  felt  as  if  a  trap  was  closing  about  them;  but  they  did 
not  quite  lose  heart.  They  still  remembered  the  hopeful  view 
they  had  had  of  the  line  of  the  Road  ahead,  and  they  still 
knew  in  which  direction  it  lay.  In  any  case,  they  now  had  so 
great  a  dislike  for  that  hollow  place  about  the  stone  that  no 
thought  of  remaining  there  was  in  their  minds.  They  packed 
up  as  quickly  as  their  chilled  fingers  would  work. 

Soon  they  were  leading  their  ponies  in  single  file  over  the 
rim  and  down  the  long  northward  slope  of  the  hill,  down  into 
a  foggy  sea.  As  they  went  down  the  mist  became  colder 
and  damper,  and  their  hair  hung  lank  and  dripping  on  their 
foreheads.  When  they  reached  the  bottom  it  was  so  chill  that 
they  halted  and  got  out  cloaks  and  hoods,  which  soon  became 
bedewed  with  grey  drops.  Then,  mounting  their  ponies,  they 
went  slowly  on  again,  feeling  their  way  by  the  rise  and  fall  of 
the  ground.  They  were  steering,  as  well  as  they  could  guess, 
for  the  gate -like  opening  at  the  far  northward  end  of  the  long 
valley  which  they  had  seen  in  the  morning.  Once  they  were 
through  the  gap,  they  had  only  to  keep  on  in  anything  like  a 
straight  line  and  they  were  bound  in  the  end  to  strike  the 
Road.  Their  thoughts  did  not  go  beyond  that,  except  for  a 
vague  hope  that  perhaps  away  beyond  the  Downs  there  might 
be  no  fog. 

Their  going  was  very  slow.  To  prevent  their  getting  separ¬ 
ated  and  wandering  in  different  directions  they  went  in  file, 


FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS  l8l 

with  Frodo  leading.  Sam  was  behind  him,  and  after  him  came 
Pippin,  and  then  Merry.  The  valley  seemed  to  stretch  on 
endlessly.  Suddenly  Frodo  saw  a  hopeful  sign.  On  either  side 
ahead  a  darkness  began  to  loom  through  the  mist;  and  he 
guessed  that  they  were  at  last  approaching  the  gap  in  the 
hills,  the  north-gate  of  the  Barrow-downs.  If  they  could  pass 
that,  they  would  be  free. 

‘Come  on!  Follow  me!’  he  called  back  over  his  shoulder, 
and  he  hurried  forward.  But  his  hope  soon  changed  to  bewil¬ 
derment  and  alarm.  The  dark  patches  grew  darker,  but  they 
shrank;  and  suddenly  he  saw,  towering  ominous  before  him 
and  leaning  slightly  towards  one  another  like  the  pillars  of 
a  headless  door,  two  huge  standing  stones.  He  could  not 
remember  having  seen  any  sign  of  these  in  the  valley,  when 
he  looked  out  from  the  hill  in  the  morning.  He  had  passed 
between  them  almost  before  he  was  aware:  and  even  as  he 
did  so  darkness  seemed  to  fall  round  him.  His  pony  reared 
and  snorted,  and  he  fell  off.  When  he  looked  back  he  found 
that  he  was  alone:  the  others  had  not  followed  him. 

‘Sam!’  he  called.  ‘Pippin!  Merry!  Come  along!  Why  don’t 
you  keep  up?’ 

There  was  no  answer.  Fear  took  him,  and  he  ran  back  past 
the  stones  shouting  wildly:  ‘Sam!  Sam!  Merry!  Pippin!’  The 
pony  bolted  into  the  mist  and  vanished.  From  some  way  off, 
or  so  it  seemed,  he  thought  he  heard  a  cry:  ‘Hoy!  Frodo! 
Hoy!’  It  was  away  eastward,  on  his  left  as  he  stood  under  the 
great  stones,  staring  and  straining  into  the  gloom.  He  plunged 
off  in  the  direction  of  the  call,  and  found  himself  going  steeply 
uphill. 

As  he  struggled  on  he  called  again,  and  kept  on  calling 
more  and  more  frantically;  but  he  heard  no  answer  for  some 
time,  and  then  it  seemed  faint  and  far  ahead  and  high  above 
him.  ‘Frodo!  Hoy!’  came  the  thin  voices  out  of  the  mist:  and 
then  a  cry  that  sounded  like  help ,  help!  often  repeated,  ending 
with  a  last  help!  that  trailed  off  into  a  long  wail  suddenly  cut 
short.  He  stumbled  forward  with  all  the  speed  he  could 
towards  the  cries;  but  the  light  was  now  gone,  and  clinging 


i82 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


night  had  closed  about  him,  so  that  it  was  impossible  to  be 
sure  of  any  direction.  He  seemed  all  the  time  to  be  climbing 
up  and  up. 

Only  the  change  in  the  level  of  the  ground  at  his  feet  told 
him  when  he  at  last  came  to  the  top  of  a  ridge  or  hill.  He  was 
weary,  sweating  and  yet  chilled.  It  was  wholly  dark. 

‘Where  are  you?’  he  cried  out  miserably. 

There  was  no  reply.  He  stood  listening.  He  was  suddenly 
aware  that  it  was  getting  very  cold,  and  that  up  here  a  wind 
was  beginning  to  blow,  an  icy  wind.  A  change  was  coming 
in  the  weather.  The  mist  was  flowing  past  him  now  in  shreds 
and  tatters.  His  breath  was  smoking,  and  the  darkness  was 
less  near  and  thick.  He  looked  up  and  saw  with  surprise 
that  faint  stars  were  appearing  overhead  amid  the  strands  of 
hurrying  cloud  and  fog.  The  wind  began  to  hiss  over  the 
grass. 

He  imagined  suddenly  that  he  caught  a  muffled  cry,  and 
he  made  towards  it;  and  even  as  he  went  forward  the  mist  was 
rolled  up  and  thrust  aside,  and  the  starry  sky  was  unveiled.  A 
glance  showed  him  that  he  was  now  facing  southwards  and 
was  on  a  round  hill-top,  which  he  must  have  climbed  from 
the  north.  Out  of  the  east  the  biting  wind  was  blowing.  To 
his  right  there  loomed  against  the  westward  stars  a  dark  black 
shape.  A  great  barrow  stood  there. 

‘Where  are  you?’  he  cried  again,  both  angry  and  afraid. 

‘Here!’  said  a  voice,  deep  and  cold,  that  seemed  to  come 
out  of  the  ground.  ‘I  am  waiting  for  you!’ 

‘No!’  said  Frodo;  but  he  did  not  run  away.  His  knees  gave, 
and  he  fell  on  the  ground.  Nothing  happened,  and  there  was 
no  sound.  Trembling  he  looked  up,  in  time  to  see  a  tall  dark 
figure  like  a  shadow  against  the  stars.  It  leaned  over  him.  He 
thought  there  were  two  eyes,  very  cold  though  lit  with  a  pale 
light  that  seemed  to  come  from  some  remote  distance.  Then 
a  grip  stronger  and  colder  than  iron  seized  him.  The  icy 
touch  froze  his  bones,  and  he  remembered  no  more. 


FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS  183 

When  he  came  to  himself  again,  for  a  moment  he  could 
recall  nothing  except  a  sense  of  dread.  Then  suddenly  he 
knew  that  he  was  imprisoned,  caught  hopelessly;  he  was  in  a 
barrow.  A  Barrow-wight  had  taken  him,  and  he  was  probably 
already  under  the  dreadful  spells  of  the  Barrow-wights  about 
which  whispered  tales  spoke.  He  dared  not  move,  but  lay  as 
he  found  himself:  flat  on  his  back  upon  a  cold  stone  with  his 
hands  on  his  breast. 

But  though  his  fear  was  so  great  that  it  seemed  to  be  part 
of  the  very  darkness  that  was  round  him,  he  found  himself 
as  he  lay  thinking  about  Bilbo  Baggins  and  his  stories,  of  their 
jogging  along  together  in  the  lanes  of  the  Shire  and  talking 
about  roads  and  adventures.  There  is  a  seed  of  courage 
hidden  (often  deeply,  it  is  true)  in  the  heart  of  the  fattest 
and  most  timid  hobbit,  waiting  for  some  final  and  desperate 
danger  to  make  it  grow.  Frodo  was  neither  very  fat  nor  very 
timid;  indeed,  though  he  did  not  know  it,  Bilbo  (and 
Gandalf)  had  thought  him  the  best  hobbit  in  the  Shire.  He 
thought  he  had  come  to  the  end  of  his  adventure,  and  a 
terrible  end,  but  the  thought  hardened  him.  He  found  himself 
stiffening,  as  if  for  a  final  spring;  he  no  longer  felt  limp  like  a 
helpless  prey. 

As  he  lay  there,  thinking  and  getting  a  hold  of  himself,  he 
noticed  all  at  once  that  the  darkness  was  slowly  giving  way: 
a  pale  greenish  light  was  growing  round  him.  It  did  not  at 
first  show  him  what  kind  of  a  place  he  was  in,  for  the  light 
seemed  to  be  coming  out  of  himself,  and  from  the  floor  beside 
him,  and  had  not  yet  reached  the  roof  or  wall.  He  turned,  and 
there  in  the  cold  glow  he  saw  lying  beside  him  Sam,  Pippin, 
and  Merry.  They  were  on  their  backs,  and  their  faces  looked 
deathly  pale;  and  they  were  clad  in  white.  About  them  lay 
many  treasures,  of  gold  maybe,  though  in  that  light  they 
looked  cold  and  unlovely.  On  their  heads  were  circlets,  gold 
chains  were  about  their  waists,  and  on  their  fingers  were  many 
rings.  Swords  lay  by  their  sides,  and  shields  were  at  their  feet. 
But  across  their  three  necks  lay  one  long  naked  sword. 


1 84  THE  fellowship  of  the  ring 

Suddenly  a  song  began:  a  cold  murmur,  rising  and  falling. 
The  voice  seemed  far  away  and  immeasurably  dreary,  some¬ 
times  high  in  the  air  and  thin,  sometimes  like  a  low  moan 
from  the  ground.  Out  of  the  formless  stream  of  sad  but 
horrible  sounds,  strings  of  words  would  now  and  again  shape 
themselves:  grim,  hard,  cold  words,  heartless  and  miserable. 
The  night  was  railing  against  the  morning  of  which  it  was 
bereaved,  and  the  cold  was  cursing  the  warmth  for  which  it 
hungered.  Frodo  was  chilled  to  the  marrow.  After  a  while  the 
song  became  clearer,  and  with  dread  in  his  heart  he  perceived 
that  it  had  changed  into  an  incantation: 

Cold  be  hand  and  heart  and  bone, 

and  cold  be  sleep  under  stone: 

never  more  to  wake  on  stony  bed, 

never,  till  the  Sun  fails  and  the  Moon  is  dead. 

In  the  black  wind  the  stars  shall  die, 
and  still  on  gold  here  let  them  lie, 
till  the  dark  lord  lifts  his  hand 
over  dead  sea  and  withered  land. 

He  heard  behind  his  head  a  creaking  and  scraping  sound. 
Raising  himself  on  one  arm  he  looked,  and  saw  now  in  the 
pale  light  that  they  were  in  a  kind  of  passage  which  behind 
them  turned  a  corner.  Round  the  corner  a  long  arm  was 
groping,  walking  on  its  fingers  towards  Sam,  who  was  lying 
nearest,  and  towards  the  hilt  of  the  sword  that  lay  upon  him. 

At  first  Frodo  felt  as  if  he  had  indeed  been  turned  into 
stone  by  the  incantation.  Then  a  wild  thought  of  escape  came 
to  him.  He  wondered  if  he  put  on  the  Ring,  whether  the 
Barrow-wight  would  miss  him,  and  he  might  find  some  way 
out.  He  thought  of  himself  running  free  over  the  grass,  griev¬ 
ing  for  Merry,  and  Sam,  and  Pippin,  but  free  and  alive  him¬ 
self.  Gandalf  would  admit  that  there  had  been  nothing  else 
he  could  do. 

But  the  courage  that  had  been  awakened  in  him  was  now 
too  strong:  he  could  not  leave  his  friends  so  easily.  He 


FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS 


185 


wavered,  groping  in  his  pocket,  and  then  fought  with  himself 
again;  and  as  he  did  so  the  arm  crept  nearer.  Suddenly  resolve 
hardened  in  him,  and  he  seized  a  short  sword  that  lay  beside 
him,  and  kneeling  he  stooped  low  over  the  bodies  of  his 
companions.  With  what  strength  he  had  he  hewed  at  the 
crawling  arm  near  the  wrist,  and  the  hand  broke  off;  but  at 
the  same  moment  the  sword  splintered  up  to  the  hilt.  There 
was  a  shriek  and  the  light  vanished.  In  the  dark  there  was  a 
snarling  noise. 

Frodo  fell  forward  over  Merry,  and  Merry’s  face  felt  cold. 
All  at  once  back  into  his  mind,  from  which  it  had  disappeared 
with  the  first  coming  of  the  fog,  came  the  memory  of  the 
house  down  under  the  Hill,  and  of  Tom  singing.  He  re¬ 
membered  the  rhyme  that  Tom  had  taught  them.  In  a  small 
desperate  voice  he  began:  Ho!  Tom  Bombadil!  and  with  that 
name  his  voice  seemed  to  grow  strong:  it  had  a  full  and 
lively  sound,  and  the  dark  chamber  echoed  as  if  to  drum  and 
trumpet. 

Ho!  Tom  Bombadil,  Tom  Bombadillo! 

By  water,  wood  and  hill,  by  the  reed  and  willow, 

By  fire,  sun  and  moon,  harken  now  and  hear  us! 

Come,  Tom  Bombadil,  for  our  need  is  near  us! 

There  was  a  sudden  deep  silence,  in  which  Frodo  could 
hear  his  heart  beating.  After  a  long  slow  moment  he  heard 
plain,  but  far  away,  as  if  it  was  coming  down  through  the 
ground  or  through  thick  walls,  an  answering  voice  singing: 

Old  Tom  Bombadil  is  a  merry  fellow, 

Bright  blue  his  jacket  is,  and  his  boots  are  yellow. 

None  has  ever  caught  him  yet,  for  Tom,  he  is  the  master: 

His  songs  are  stronger  songs,  and  his  feet  are  faster. 

There  was  a  loud  rumbling  sound,  as  of  stones  rolling  and 
falling,  and  suddenly  light  streamed  in,  real  light,  the  plain 
light  of  day.  A  low  door-like  opening  appeared  at  the  end  of 


i86 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


the  chamber  beyond  Frodo’s  feet;  and  there  was  Tom’s  head 
(hat,  feather,  and  all)  framed  against  the  light  of  the  sun 
rising  red  behind  him.  The  light  fell  upon  the  floor,  and  upon 
the  faces  of  the  three  hobbits  lying  beside  Frodo.  They  did 
not  stir,  but  the  sickly  hue  had  left  them.  They  looked  now 
as  if  they  were  only  very  deeply  asleep. 

Tom  stooped,  removed  his  hat,  and  came  into  the  dark 
chamber,  singing: 

Get  out,  you  old  Wight!  Vanish  in  the  sunlight! 

Shrivel  like  the  cold  mist,  like  the  winds  go  wailing, 

Out  into  the  barren  lands  far  beyond  the  mountains! 

Come  never  here  again!  Leave  your  barrow  empty! 

Lost  and  forgotten  be,  darker  than  the  darkness, 

Where  gates  stand  for  ever  shut,  till  the  world  is  mended. 

At  these  words  there  was  a  cry  and  part  of  the  inner  end 
of  the  chamber  fell  in  with  a  crash.  Then  there  was  a  long 
trailing  shriek,  fading  away  into  an  unguessable  distance;  and 
after  that  silence. 

‘Come,  friend  Frodo!’  said  Tom.  ‘Let  us  get  out  on  to 
clean  grass!  You  must  help  me  bear  them.’ 

Together  they  carried  out  Merry,  Pippin,  and  Sam.  As 
Frodo  left  the  barrow  for  the  last  time  he  thought  he  saw  a 
severed  hand  wriggling  still,  like  a  wounded  spider,  in  a  heap 
of  fallen  earth.  Tom  went  back  in  again,  and  there  was  a 
sound  of  much  thumping  and  stamping.  When  he  came  out 
he  was  bearing  in  his  arms  a  great  load  of  treasure:  things  of 
gold,  silver,  copper,  and  bronze;  many  beads  and  chains  and 
jewelled  ornaments.  He  climbed  the  green  barrow  and  laid 
them  all  on  top  in  the  sunshine. 

There  he  stood,  with  his  hat  in  his  hand  and  the  wind  in 
his  hair,  and  looked  down  upon  the  three  hobbits,  that  had 
been  laid  on  their  backs  upon  the  grass  at  the  west  side  of 
the  mound.  Raising  his  right  hand  he  said  in  a  clear  and 
commanding  voice: 


FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS 


I87 


Wake  now  my  merry  lads!  Wake  and  hear  me  calling! 

Warm  now  be  heart  and  limb!  The  cold  stone  is  fallen; 

Dark  door  is  standing  wide;  dead  hand  is  broken. 

Night  under  Night  is  flown,  and  the  Gate  is  open! 

To  Frodo’s  great  joy  the  hobbits  stirred,  stretched  their 
arms,  rubbed  their  eyes,  and  then  suddenly  sprang  up.  They 
looked  about  in  amazement,  first  at  Frodo,  and  then  at  Tom 
standing  large  as  life  on  the  barrow-top  above  them;  and  then 
at  themselves  in  their  thin  white  rags,  crowned  and  belted 
with  pale  gold,  and  jingling  with  trinkets. 

‘What  in  the  name  of  wonder?’  began  Merry,  feeling  the 
golden  circlet  that  had  slipped  over  one  eye.  Then  he 
stopped,  and  a  shadow  came  over  his  face,  and  he  closed  his 
eyes.  ‘Of  course,  I  remember!’  he  said.  ‘The  men  of  Carn 
Dum  came  on  us  at  night,  and  we  were  worsted.  Ah!  the 
spear  in  my  heart!’  He  clutched  at  his  breast.  ‘No!  No!’  he 
said,  opening  his  eyes.  ‘What  am  I  saying?  I  have  been  dream¬ 
ing.  Where  did  you  get  to,  Frodo?’ 

‘I  thought  that  I  was  lost,’  said  Frodo;  ‘but  I  don’t  want 
to  speak  of  it.  Let  us  think  of  what  we  are  to  do  now!  Let  us 
go  on!’ 

‘Dressed  up  like  this,  sir?’  said  Sam.  Where  are  my 
clothes?’  He  flung  his  circlet,  belt,  and  rings  on  the  grass,  and 
looked  round  helplessly,  as  if  he  expected  to  find  his  cloak, 
jacket,  and  breeches,  and  other  hobbit-garments  lying  some¬ 
where  to  hand. 

‘You  won’t  find  your  clothes  again,’  said  Tom,  bounding 
down  from  the  mound,  and  laughing  as  he  danced  round 
them  in  the  sunlight.  One  would  have  thought  that  nothing 
dangerous  or  dreadful  had  happened;  and  indeed  the  horror 
faded  out  of  their  hearts  as  they  looked  at  him,  and  saw  the 
merry  glint  in  his  eyes. 

‘What  do  you  mean?’  asked  Pippin,  looking  at  him,  half 
puzzled  and  half  amused.  ‘Why  not?’ 

But  Tom  shook  his  head,  saying:  ‘You’ve  found  your¬ 
selves  again,  out  of  the  deep  water.  Clothes  are  but  little  loss, 


i88 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


if  you  escape  from  drowning.  Be  glad,  my  merry  friends, 
and  let  the  warm  sunlight  heat  now  heart  and  limb!  Cast  off 
these  cold  rags!  Run  naked  on  the  grass,  while  Tom  goes 
a-hunting!’ 

He  sprang  away  down  hill,  whistling  and  calling.  Looking 
down  after  him  Frodo  saw  him  running  away  southwards 
along  the  green  hollow  between  their  hill  and  the  next,  still 
whistling  and  crying: 

Hey!  now!  Come  hoy  now!  WJnther  do  you  wander? 

Up,  down,  near  or  far,  here,  there  or  yonder? 

Sharp-ears,  Wise-nose,  Swish-tail  and  Bumpkin, 

White-socks  my  little  lad,  and  old  Fatty  Lumpkin! 

So  he  sang,  running  fast,  tossing  up  his  hat  and  catching 
it,  until  he  was  hidden  by  a  fold  of  the  ground:  but  for  some 
time  his  hey  now!  hoy  now!  came  floating  back  down  the  wind, 
which  had  shifted  round  towards  the  south. 

The  air  was  growing  very  warm  again.  The  hobbits  ran 
about  for  a  while  on  the  grass,  as  he  told  them.  Then  they 
lay  basking  in  the  sun  with  the  delight  of  those  that  have  been 
wafted  suddenly  from  bitter  winter  to  a  friendly  clime,  or  of 
people  that,  after  being  long  ill  and  bedridden,  wake  one  day 
to  find  that  they  are  unexpectedly  well  and  the  day  is  again 
full  of  promise. 

By  the  time  that  Tom  returned  they  were  feeling  strong 
(and  hungry).  He  reappeared,  hat  first,  over  the  brow  of  the 
hill,  and  behind  him  came  in  an  obedient  line  six  ponies: 
their  own  five  and  one  more.  The  last  was  plainly  old  Fatty 
Lumpkin:  he  was  larger,  stronger,  fatter  (and  older)  than 
their  own  ponies.  Merry,  to  whom  the  others  belonged,  had 
not,  in  fact,  given  them  any  such  names,  but  they  answered 
to  the  new  names  that  Tom  had  given  them  for  the  rest  of 
their  lives.  Tom  called  them  one  by  one  and  they  climbed 
over  the  brow  and  stood  in  a  line.  Then  Tom  bowed  to  the 
hobbits. 


FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS  189 

‘Here  are  your  ponies,  now!’  he  said.  ‘They’ve  more  sense 
(in  some  ways)  than  you  wandering  hobbits  have  -  more 
sense  in  their  noses.  For  they  sniff  danger  ahead  which  you 
walk  right  into;  and  if  they  run  to  save  themselves,  then  they 
run  the  right  way.  You  must  forgive  them  all;  for  though  their 
hearts  are  faithful,  to  face  fear  of  Barrow-wights  is  not  what 
they  were  made  for.  See,  here  they  come  again,  bringing  all 
their  burdens!’ 

Merry,  Sam,  and  Pippin  now  clothed  themselves  in  spare 
garments  from  their  packs;  and  they  soon  felt  too  hot,  for 
they  were  obliged  to  put  on  some  of  the  thicker  and  warmer 
things  that  they  had  brought  against  the  oncoming  of  winter. 

‘Where  does  that  other  old  animal,  that  Fatty  Lumpkin, 
come  from?’  asked  Frodo. 

‘He’s  mine,’  said  Tom.  ‘My  four-legged  friend;  though  I 
seldom  ride  him,  and  he  wanders  often  far,  free  upon  the 
hillsides.  When  your  ponies  stayed  with  me,  they  got  to  know 
my  Lumpkin;  and  they  smelt  him  in  the  night,  and  quickly 
ran  to  meet  him.  I  thought  he’d  look  for  them  and  with  his 
words  of  wisdom  take  all  their  fear  away.  But  now,  my  jolly 
Lumpkin,  old  Tom’s  going  to  ride.  Hey!  he’s  coming  with 
you,  just  to  set  you  on  the  road;  so  he  needs  a  pony.  For  you 
cannot  easily  talk  to  hobbits  that  are  riding,  when  you’re  on 
your  own  legs  trying  to  trot  beside  them.’ 

The  hobbits  were  delighted  to  hear  this,  and  thanked  Tom 
many  times;  but  he  laughed,  and  said  that  they  were  so  good 
at  losing  themselves  that  he  would  not  feel  happy  till  he  had 
seen  them  safe  over  the  borders  of  his  land.  ‘I’ve  got  things 
to  do,’  he  said:  ‘my  making  and  my  singing,  my  talking  and 
my  walking,  and  my  watching  of  the  country.  Tom  can’t  be 
always  near  to  open  doors  and  willow-cracks.  Tom  has  his 
house  to  mind,  and  Goldberry  is  waiting.’ 

It  was  still  fairly  early  by  the  sun,  something  between  nine 
and  ten,  and  the  hobbits  turned  their  minds  to  food.  Their 
last  meal  had  been  lunch  beside  the  standing  stone  the  day 
before.  They  breakfasted  now  off  the  remainder  of  Tom’s 


190  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

provisions,  meant  for  their  supper,  with  additions  that  Tom 
had  brought  with  him.  It  was  not  a  large  meal  (considering 
hobbits  and  the  circumstances),  but  they  felt  much  better  for 
it.  While  they  were  eating  Tom  went  up  to  the  mound,  and 
looked  through  the  treasures.  Most  of  these  he  made  into  a 
pile  that  glistered  and  sparkled  on  the  grass.  He  bade  them 
lie  there  ‘free  to  all  finders,  birds,  beasts,  Elves  or  Men,  and 
all  kindly  creatures’;  for  so  the  spell  of  the  mound  should  be 
broken  and  scattered  and  no  Wight  ever  come  back  to  it.  He 
chose  for  himself  from  the  pile  a  brooch  set  with  blue  stones, 
many-shaded  like  flax-flowers  or  the  wings  of  blue  butterflies. 
He  looked  long  at  it,  as  if  stirred  by  some  memory,  shaking 
his  head,  and  saying  at  last: 

‘Here  is  a  pretty  toy  for  Tom  and  for  his  lady!  Fair  was 
she  who  long  ago  wore  this  on  her  shoulder.  Goldberry  shall 
wear  it  now,  and  we  will  not  forget  her!’ 

For  each  of  the  hobbits  he  chose  a  dagger,  long,  leaf¬ 
shaped,  and  keen,  of  marvellous  workmanship,  damasked 
with  serpent-forms  in  red  and  gold.  They  gleamed  as  he 
drew  them  from  their  black  sheaths,  wrought  of  some  strange 
metal,  light  and  strong,  and  set  with  many  fiery  stones. 
Whether  by  some  virtue  in  these  sheaths  or  because  of  the 
spell  that  lay  on  the  mound,  the  blades  seemed  untouched 
by  time,  unrusted,  sharp,  glittering  in  the  sun. 

‘Old  knives  are  long  enough  as  swords  for  hobbit-people,’ 
he  said.  ‘Sharp  blades  are  good  to  have,  if  Shire -folk  go 
walking,  east,  south,  or  far  away  into  dark  and  danger.’  Then 
he  told  them  that  these  blades  were  forged  many  long  years 
ago  by  Men  of  Westernesse:  they  were  foes  of  the  Dark  Lord, 
but  they  were  overcome  by  the  evil  king  of  Carn  Dum  in  the 
Land  of  Angmar. 

‘Few  now  remember  them,’  Tom  murmured,  ‘yet  still 
some  go  wandering,  sons  of  forgotten  kings  walking  in  lone¬ 
liness,  guarding  from  evil  things  folk  that  are  heedless.’ 

The  hobbits  did  not  understand  his  words,  but  as  he  spoke 
they  had  a  vision  as  it  were  of  a  great  expanse  of  years  behind 
them,  like  a  vast  shadowy  plain  over  which  there  strode 


FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS  191 

shapes  of  Men,  tall  and  grim  with  bright  swords,  and  last 
came  one  with  a  star  on  his  brow.  Then  the  vision  faded,  and 
they  were  back  in  the  sunlit  world.  It  was  time  to  start  again. 
They  made  ready,  packing  their  bags  and  lading  their  ponies. 
Their  new  weapons  they  hung  on  their  leather  belts  under 
their  jackets,  feeling  them  very  awkward,  and  wondering  if 
they  would  be  of  any  use.  Fighting  had  not  before  occurred 
to  any  of  them  as  one  of  the  adventures  in  which  their  flight 
would  land  them. 

At  last  they  set  off.  They  led  their  ponies  down  the  hill; 
and  then  mounting  they  trotted  quickly  along  the  valley.  They 
looked  back  and  saw  the  top  of  the  old  mound  on  the  hill, 
and  from  it  the  sunlight  on  the  gold  went  up  like  a  yellow 
flame.  Then  they  turned  a  shoulder  of  the  Downs  and  it  was 
hidden  from  view. 

Though  Frodo  looked  about  him  on  every  side  he  saw  no 
sign  of  the  great  stones  standing  like  a  gate,  and  before  long 
they  came  to  the  northern  gap  and  rode  swiftly  through,  and 
the  land  fell  away  before  them.  It  was  a  merry  journey  with 
Tom  Bombadil  trotting  gaily  beside  them,  or  before  them, 
on  Fatty  Lumpkin,  who  could  move  much  faster  than  his 
girth  promised.  Tom  sang  most  of  the  time,  but  it  was  chiefly 
nonsense,  or  else  perhaps  a  strange  language  unknown  to  the 
hobbits,  an  ancient  language  whose  words  were  mainly  those 
of  wonder  and  delight. 

They  went  forward  steadily,  but  they  soon  saw  that  the 
Road  was  further  away  than  they  had  imagined.  Even  without 
a  fog,  their  sleep  at  mid-day  would  have  prevented  them  from 
reaching  it  until  after  nightfall  on  the  day  before.  The  dark 
line  they  had  seen  was  not  a  line  of  trees  but  a  line  of  bushes 
growing  on  the  edge  of  a  deep  dike  with  a  steep  wall  on  the 
further  side.  Tom  said  that  it  had  once  been  the  boundary  of 
a  kingdom,  but  a  very  long  time  ago.  He  seemed  to  remember 
something  sad  about  it,  and  would  not  say  much. 

They  climbed  down  and  out  of  the  dike  and  through  a  gap 
in  the  wall,  and  then  Tom  turned  due  north,  for  they  had 


192  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

been  bearing  somewhat  to  the  west.  The  land  was  now  open 
and  fairly  level,  and  they  quickened  their  pace,  but  the  sun 
was  already  sinking  low  when  at  last  they  saw  a  line  of  tall 
trees  ahead,  and  they  knew  that  they  had  come  back  to  the 
Road  after  many  unexpected  adventures.  They  galloped  their 
ponies  over  the  last  furlongs,  and  halted  under  the  long 
shadows  of  the  trees.  They  were  on  the  top  of  a  sloping  bank, 
and  the  Road,  now  dim  as  evening  drew  on,  wound  away 
below  them.  At  this  point  it  ran  nearly  from  South-west  to 
North-east,  and  on  their  right  it  fell  quickly  down  into  a  wide 
hollow.  It  was  rutted  and  bore  many  signs  of  the  recent  heavy 
rain;  there  were  pools  and  pot-holes  full  of  water. 

They  rode  down  the  bank  and  looked  up  and  down.  There 
was  nothing  to  be  seen.  ‘Well,  here  we  are  again  at  last!’  said 
Frodo.  ‘I  suppose  we  haven’t  lost  more  than  two  days  by  my 
short  cut  through  the  Forest!  But  perhaps  the  delay  will  prove 
useful  -  it  may  have  put  them  off  our  trail.’ 

The  others  looked  at  him.  The  shadow  of  the  fear  of  the 
Black  Riders  came  suddenly  over  them  again.  Ever  since  they 
had  entered  the  Forest  they  had  thought  chiefly  of  getting 
back  to  the  Road;  only  now  when  it  lay  beneath  their  feet  did 
they  remember  the  danger  which  pursued  them,  and  was 
more  than  likely  to  be  lying  in  wait  for  them  upon  the  Road 
itself.  They  looked  anxiously  back  towards  the  setting  sun, 
but  the  Road  was  brown  and  empty. 

‘Do  you  think,’  asked  Pippin  hesitatingly,  ‘do  you  think  we 
may  be  pursued,  tonight?’ 

‘No,  I  hope  not  tonight,’  answered  Tom  Bombadil;  ‘nor 
perhaps  the  next  day.  But  do  not  trust  my  guess;  for  I  cannot 
tell  for  certain.  Out  east  my  knowledge  fails.  Tom  is  not 
master  of  Riders  from  the  Black  Land  far  beyond  his 
country.’ 

All  the  same  the  hobbits  wished  he  was  coming  with  them. 
They  felt  that  he  would  know  how  to  deal  with  Black  Riders, 
if  anyone  did.  They  would  soon  now  be  going  forward  into 
lands  wholly  strange  to  them,  and  beyond  all  but  the  most 
vague  and  distant  legends  of  the  Shire,  and  in  the  gathering 


FOG  ON  THE  BARROW-DOWNS 


193 


twilight  they  longed  for  home.  A  deep  loneliness  and  sense 
of  loss  was  on  them.  They  stood  silent,  reluctant  to  make  the 
final  parting,  and  only  slowly  became  aware  that  Tom  was 
wishing  them  farewell,  and  telling  them  to  have  good  heart 
and  to  ride  on  till  dark  without  halting. 

‘Tom  will  give  you  good  advice,  till  this  day  is  over  (after 
that  your  own  luck  must  go  with  you  and  guide  you) :  four 
miles  along  the  Road  you’ll  come  upon  a  village,  Bree  under 
Bree-hill,  with  doors  looking  westward.  There  you’ll  find  an 
old  inn  that  is  called  The  Prancing  Pony.  Barliman  Butterbur 
is  the  worthy  keeper.  There  you  can  stay  the  night,  and 
afterwards  the  morning  will  speed  you  upon  your  way.  Be 
bold,  but  wary!  Keep  up  your  merry  hearts,  and  ride  to  meet 
your  fortune!’ 

They  begged  him  to  come  at  least  as  far  as  the  inn  and 
drink  once  more  with  them;  but  he  laughed  and  refused, 
saying: 

Tom’s  country  ends  here:  he  will  not  pass  the  borders. 

Tom  has  his  house  to  mind,  and  Goldberry  is  waiting! 

Then  he  turned,  tossed  up  his  hat,  leaped  on  Lumpkin’s 
back,  and  rode  up  over  the  bank  and  away  singing  into  the 
dusk. 

The  hobbits  climbed  up  and  watched  him  until  he  was  out 
of  sight. 

‘I  am  sorry  to  take  leave  of  Master  Bombadil,’  said  Sam. 
‘He’s  a  caution  and  no  mistake.  I  reckon  we  may  go  a  good 
deal  further  and  see  naught  better,  nor  queerer.  But  I  won’t 
deny  I’ll  be  glad  to  see  this  Prancing  Pony  he  spoke  of.  I  hope 
it’ll  be  like  The  Green  Dragon  away  back  home!  What  sort  of 
folic  are  they  in  Bree?’ 

‘There  are  hobbits  in  Bree,’  said  Merry,  ‘as  well  as  Big 
Folk.  I  daresay  it  will  be  homelike  enough.  The  Pony  is  a  good 
inn  by  all  accounts.  My  people  ride  out  there  now  and  again.’ 

‘It  may  be  all  we  could  wish,’  said  Frodo;  ‘but  it  is  outside 
the  Shire  all  the  same.  Don’t  make  yourselves  too  much  at 


194 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


home!  Please  remember  -  all  of  you  -  that  the  name  of 
Baggins  must  NOT  be  mentioned.  I  am  Mr.  Underhill,  if  any 
name  must  be  given.’ 

They  now  mounted  their  ponies  and  rode  off  silently  into 
the  evening.  Darkness  came  down  quickly,  as  they  plodded 
slowly  downhill  and  up  again,  until  at  last  they  saw  lights 
twinkling  some  distance  ahead. 

Before  them  rose  Bree-hill  barring  the  way,  a  dark  mass 
against  misty  stars;  and  under  its  western  flank  nestled  a  large 
village.  Towards  it  they  now  hurried  desiring  only  to  find  a 
fire,  and  a  door  between  them  and  the  night. 


Chapter  9 


AT  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  PRANCING  PONY 


Bree  was  the  chief  village  of  the  Bree-land,  a  small  inhabited 
region,  like  an  island  in  the  empty  lands  round  about.  Besides 
Bree  itself,  there  was  Staddle  on  the  other  side  of  the  hill, 
Combe  in  a  deep  valley  a  little  further  eastward,  and  Archet 
on  the  edge  of  the  Chetwood.  Lying  round  Bree-hill  and  the 
villages  was  a  small  country  of  fields  and  tamed  woodland 
only  a  few  miles  broad. 

The  Men  of  Bree  were  brown-haired,  broad,  and  rather 
short,  cheerful  and  independent:  they  belonged  to  nobody 
but  themselves;  but  they  were  more  friendly  and  familiar  with 
Hobbits,  Dwarves,  Elves,  and  other  inhabitants  of  the  world 
about  them  than  was  (or  is)  usual  with  Big  People.  According 
to  their  own  tales  they  were  the  original  inhabitants  and  were 
the  descendants  of  the  first  Men  that  ever  wandered  into  the 
West  of  the  middle-world.  Few  had  survived  the  turmoils  of 
the  Elder  Days;  but  when  the  Kings  returned  again  over  the 
Great  Sea  they  had  found  the  Bree-men  still  there,  and  they 
were  still  there  now,  when  the  memory  of  the  old  Kings  had 
faded  into  the  grass. 

In  those  days  no  other  Men  had  settled  dwellings  so  far 
west,  or  within  a  hundred  leagues  of  the  Shire.  But  in  the 
wild  lands  beyond  Bree  there  were  mysterious  wanderers. 
The  Bree-folk  called  them  Rangers,  and  knew  nothing  of 
their  origin.  They  were  taller  and  darker  than  the  Men  of 
Bree  and  were  believed  to  have  strange  powers  of  sight 
and  hearing,  and  to  understand  the  languages  of  beasts 
and  birds.  They  roamed  at  will  southwards,  and  eastwards 
even  as  far  as  the  Misty  Mountains;  but  they  were  now 
few  and  rarely  seen.  When  they  appeared  they  brought 
news  from  afar,  and  told  strange  forgotten  tales  which  were 


196  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

eagerly  listened  to;  but  the  Bree-folk  did  not  make  friends 
of  them. 

There  were  also  many  families  of  hobbits  in  the  Bree-land; 
and  they  claimed  to  be  the  oldest  settlement  of  Hobbits  in  the 
world,  one  that  was  founded  long  before  even  the  Brandy¬ 
wine  was  crossed  and  the  Shire  colonized.  They  lived  mostly 
in  Staddle  though  there  were  some  in  Bree  itself,  especially 
on  the  higher  slopes  of  the  hill,  above  the  houses  of  the  Men. 
The  Big  Folk  and  the  Little  Folk  (as  they  called  one  another) 
were  on  friendly  terms,  minding  their  own  affairs  in  their 
own  ways,  but  both  rightly  regarding  themselves  as  necessary 
parts  of  the  Bree-folk.  Nowhere  else  in  the  world  was  this 
peculiar  (but  excellent)  arrangement  to  be  found. 

The  Bree-folk,  Big  and  Little,  did  not  themselves  travel 
much;  and  the  affairs  of  the  four  villages  were  their  chief 
concern.  Occasionally  the  Hobbits  of  Bree  went  as  far  as 
Buckland,  or  the  Eastfarthing;  but  though  their  little  land  was 
not  much  further  than  a  day’s  riding  east  of  the  Brandywine 
Bridge,  the  Hobbits  of  the  Shire  now  seldom  visited  it.  An 
occasional  Bucklander  or  adventurous  Took  would  come  out 
to  the  Inn  for  a  night  or  two,  but  even  that  was  becoming 
less  and  less  usual.  The  Shire -hobbits  referred  to  those  of 
Bree,  and  to  any  others  that  lived  beyond  the  borders,  as 
Outsiders,  and  took  very  little  interest  in  them,  considering 
them  dull  and  uncouth.  There  were  probably  many  more 
Outsiders  scattered  about  in  the  West  of  the  World  in  those 
days  than  the  people  of  the  Shire  imagined.  Some,  doubtless, 
were  no  better  than  tramps,  ready  to  dig  a  hole  in  any  bank 
and  stay  only  as  long  as  it  suited  them.  But  in  the  Bree-land, 
at  any  rate,  the  hobbits  were  decent  and  prosperous,  and  no 
more  rustic  than  most  of  their  distant  relatives  Inside.  It  was 
not  yet  forgotten  that  there  had  been  a  time  when  there  was 
much  coming  and  going  between  the  Shire  and  Bree.  There 
was  Bree-blood  in  the  Brandybucks  by  all  accounts. 

The  village  of  Bree  had  some  hundred  stone  houses  of  the 
Big  Folic,  mostly  above  the  Road,  nestling  on  the  hillside  with 


AT  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  PRANCING  PONY  197 

windows  looking  west.  On  that  side,  running  in  more  than 
half  a  circle  from  the  hill  and  back  to  it,  there  was  a  deep  dike 
with  a  thick  hedge  on  the  inner  side.  Over  this  the  Road 
crossed  by  a  causeway;  but  where  it  pierced  the  hedge  it  was 
barred  by  a  great  gate.  There  was  another  gate  in  the  southern 
corner  where  the  Road  ran  out  of  the  village.  The  gates  were 
closed  at  nightfall;  but  just  inside  them  were  small  lodges  for 
the  gatekeepers. 

Down  on  the  Road,  where  it  swept  to  the  right  to  go  round 
the  foot  of  the  hill,  there  was  a  large  inn.  It  had  been  built 
long  ago  when  the  traffic  on  the  roads  had  been  far  greater. 
For  Bree  stood  at  an  old  meeting  of  ways;  another  ancient 
road  crossed  the  East  Road  just  outside  the  dike  at  the  western 
end  of  the  village,  and  in  former  days  Men  and  other  folic 
of  various  sorts  had  travelled  much  on  it.  Strange  as  News 
from  Bree  was  still  a  saying  in  the  Eastfarthing,  descending 
from  those  days,  when  news  from  North,  South,  and  East 
could  be  heard  in  the  inn,  and  when  the  Shire-hobbits 
used  to  go  more  often  to  hear  it.  But  the  Northern  Lands 
had  long  been  desolate,  and  the  North  Road  was  now  seldom 
used:  it  was  grass-grown,  and  the  Bree-folk  called  it  the 
Greenway. 

The  Inn  of  Bree  was  still  there,  however,  and  the  innkeeper 
was  an  important  person.  His  house  was  a  meeting  place  for 
the  idle,  talkative,  and  inquisitive  among  the  inhabitants,  large 
and  small,  of  the  four  villages;  and  a  resort  of  Rangers  and 
other  wanderers,  and  for  such  travellers  (mostly  dwarves)  as 
still  journeyed  on  the  East  Road,  to  and  from  the  Mountains. 

It  was  dark,  and  white  stars  were  shining,  when  Frodo  and 
his  companions  came  at  last  to  the  Greenway-crossing  and 
drew  near  the  village.  They  came  to  the  West-gate  and  found 
it  shut;  but  at  the  door  of  the  lodge  beyond  it,  there  was  a 
man  sitting.  He  jumped  up  and  fetched  a  lantern  and  looked 
over  the  gate  at  them  in  surprise. 

What  do  you  want,  and  where  do  you  come  from?’  he 
asked  gruffly. 


198  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

‘We  are  making  for  the  inn  here,’  answered  Frodo.  We 
are  journeying  east  and  cannot  go  further  tonight.’ 

‘Hobbits!  Four  hobbits!  And  what’s  more,  out  of  the  Shire 
by  their  talk,’  said  the  gatekeeper,  softly  as  if  speaking  to 
himself.  He  stared  at  them  darkly  for  a  moment,  and  then 
slowly  opened  the  gate  and  let  them  ride  through. 

We  don’t  often  see  Shire-folk  riding  on  the  Road  at  night,’ 
he  went  on,  as  they  halted  a  moment  by  his  door.  ‘You’ll 
pardon  my  wondering  what  business  takes  you  away  east  of 
Bree!  What  may  your  names  be,  might  I  ask?’ 

‘Our  names  and  our  business  are  our  own,  and  this  does 
not  seem  a  good  place  to  discuss  them,’  said  Frodo,  not  liking 
the  look  of  the  man  or  the  tone  of  his  voice. 

‘Your  business  is  your  own,  no  doubt,’  said  the  man;  ‘but 
it’s  my  business  to  ask  questions  after  nightfall.’ 

We  are  hobbits  from  Buckland,  and  we  have  a  fancy  to 
travel  and  to  stay  at  the  inn  here,’  put  in  Merry.  ‘I  am  Mr. 
Brandybuck.  Is  that  enough  for  you?  The  Bree-folk  used  to 
be  fair-spoken  to  travellers,  or  so  I  had  heard.’ 

‘All  right,  all  right!’  said  the  man.  ‘I  meant  no  offence.  But 
you’ll  find  maybe  that  more  folk  than  old  Harry  at  the  gate 
will  be  asking  you  questions.  There’s  queer  folk  about.  If  you 
go  on  to  The  Pony ,  you’ll  find  you’re  not  the  only  guests.’ 

He  wished  them  good  night,  and  they  said  no  more;  but 
Frodo  could  see  in  the  lantern-light  that  the  man  was  still 
eyeing  them  curiously.  He  was  glad  to  hear  the  gate  clang  to 
behind  them,  as  they  rode  forward.  He  wondered  why  the 
man  was  so  suspicious,  and  whether  anyone  had  been  asking 
for  news  of  a  party  of  hobbits.  Could  it  have  been  Gandalf? 
He  might  have  arrived,  while  they  were  delayed  in  the  Forest 
and  the  Downs.  But  there  was  something  in  the  look  and  the 
voice  of  the  gatekeeper  that  made  him  uneasy. 

The  man  stared  after  the  hobbits  for  a  moment,  and  then 
he  went  back  to  his  house.  As  soon  as  his  back  was  turned,  a 
dark  figure  climbed  quickly  in  over  the  gate  and  melted  into 
the  shadows  of  the  village  street. 


AT  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  PRANCING  PONY  199 

The  hobbits  rode  on  up  a  gentle  slope,  passing  a  few 
detached  houses,  and  drew  up  outside  the  inn.  The  houses 
looked  large  and  strange  to  them.  Sam  stared  up  at  the  inn  with 
its  three  storeys  and  many  windows,  and  felt  his  heart  sink. 
He  had  imagined  himself  meeting  giants  taller  than  trees,  and 
other  creatures  even  more  terrifying,  some  time  or  other  in  the 
course  of  his  journey;  but  at  the  moment  he  was  finding  his 
first  sight  of  Men  and  their  tall  houses  quite  enough,  indeed 
too  much  for  the  dark  end  of  a  tiring  day.  He  pictured  black 
horses  standing  all  saddled  in  the  shadows  of  the  inn-yard, 
and  Black  Riders  peering  out  of  dark  upper  windows. 

‘We  surely  aren’t  going  to  stay  here  for  the  night,  are  we, 
sir?’  he  exclaimed.  ‘If  there  are  hobbit-folk  in  these  parts, 
why  don’t  we  look  for  some  that  would  be  willing  to  take  us 
in?  It  would  be  more  homelike.’ 

‘What’s  wrong  with  the  inn?’  said  Frodo.  ‘Tom  Bombadil 
recommended  it.  I  expect  it’s  homelike  enough  inside.’ 

Even  from  the  outside  the  inn  looked  a  pleasant  house  to 
familiar  eyes.  It  had  a  front  on  the  Road,  and  two  wings 
running  back  on  land  partly  cut  out  of  the  lower  slopes  of 
the  hill,  so  that  at  the  rear  the  second-floor  windows  were 
level  with  the  ground.  There  was  a  wide  arch  leading  to  a 
courtyard  between  the  two  wings,  and  on  the  left  under  the 
arch  there  was  a  large  doorway  reached  by  a  few  broad  steps. 
The  door  was  open  and  light  streamed  out  of  it.  Above  the 
arch  there  was  a  lamp,  and  beneath  it  swung  a  large  sign¬ 
board:  a  fat  white  pony  reared  up  on  its  hind  legs.  Over  the 
door  was  painted  in  white  letters:  the  prancing  pony  by 
barliman  butterbur.  Many  of  the  lower  windows  showed 
lights  behind  thick  curtains. 

As  they  hesitated  outside  in  the  gloom,  someone  began 
singing  a  merry  song  inside,  and  many  cheerful  voices  joined 
loudly  in  the  chorus.  They  listened  to  this  encouraging  sound 
for  a  moment  and  then  got  off  their  ponies.  The  song  ended 
and  there  was  a  burst  of  laughter  and  clapping. 

They  led  their  ponies  under  the  arch,  and  leaving  them 
standing  in  the  yard  they  climbed  up  the  steps.  Frodo  went 


200 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


forward  and  nearly  bumped  into  a  short  fat  man  with  a  bald 
head  and  a  red  face.  He  had  a  white  apron  on,  and  was 
bustling  out  of  one  door  and  in  through  another,  carrying  a 
tray  laden  with  full  mugs. 

‘Can  we - ’  began  Frodo. 

‘Half  a  minute,  if  you  please!’  shouted  the  man  over  his 
shoulder,  and  vanished  into  a  babel  of  voices  and  a  cloud  of 
smoke.  In  a  moment  he  was  out  again,  wiping  his  hands  on 
his  apron. 

‘Good  evening,  little  master!’  he  said,  bending  down.  ‘What 
may  you  be  wanting?’ 

‘Beds  for  four,  and  stabling  for  five  ponies,  if  that  can  be 
managed.  Are  you  Mr.  Butterbur?’ 

‘That’s  right!  Barliman  is  my  name.  Barliman  Butterbur  at 
your  service!  You’re  from  the  Shire,  eh?’  he  said,  and  then 
suddenly  he  clapped  his  hand  to  his  forehead,  as  if  trying  to 
remember  something.  ‘Hobbits!’  he  cried.  ‘Now  what  does 
that  remind  me  of?  Might  I  ask  your  names,  sirs?’ 

‘Mr.  Took  and  Mr.  Brandybuck,’  said  Frodo;  ‘and  this  is 
Sam  Gamgee.  My  name  is  Underhill.’ 

‘There  now!’  said  Mr.  Butterbur,  snapping  his  fingers.  ‘It’s 
gone  again!  But  it’ll  come  back,  when  I  have  time  to  think. 
I’m  run  off  my  feet;  but  I’ll  see  what  I  can  do  for  you.  We 
don’t  often  get  a  party  out  of  the  Shire  nowadays,  and  I 
should  be  sorry  not  to  make  you  welcome.  But  there  is  such 
a  crowd  already  in  the  house  tonight  as  there  hasn’t  been  for 
long  enough.  It  never  rains  but  it  pours,  we  say  in  Bree.’ 

‘Hi!  Nob!’  he  shouted.  ‘Where  are  you,  you  woolly-footed 
slowcoach?  Nob!’ 

‘Coming,  sir!  Coming!’  A  cheery-looking  hobbit  bobbed 
out  of  a  door,  and  seeing  the  travellers,  stopped  short  and 
stared  at  them  with  great  interest. 

‘Where’s  Bob?’  asked  the  landlord.  ‘You  don’t  know?  Well, 
find  him!  Double  sharp!  I  haven’t  got  six  legs,  nor  six  eyes 
neither!  Tell  Bob  there’s  five  ponies  that  have  to  be  stabled. 
He  must  find  room  somehow.’  Nob  trotted  off  with  a  grin 
and  a  wink. 


AT  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  PRANCING  PONY 


201 


‘Well  now,  what  was  I  going  to  say?’  said  Mr.  Butterbur, 
tapping  his  forehead.  ‘One  thing  drives  out  another,  so  to 
speak.  I’m  that  busy  tonight,  my  head  is  going  round.  There’s 
a  party  that  came  up  the  Greenway  from  down  South  last 
night  -  and  that  was  strange  enough  to  begin  with.  Then 
there’s  a  travelling  company  of  dwarves  going  West  come  in 
this  evening.  And  now  there’s  you.  If  you  weren’t  hobbits,  I 
doubt  if  we  could  house  you.  But  we’ve  got  a  room  or  two 
in  the  north  wing  that  were  made  special  for  hobbits,  when 
this  place  was  built.  On  the  ground  floor  as  they  usually 
prefer;  round  windows  and  all  as  they  like  it.  I  hope  you’ll  be 
comfortable.  You’ll  be  wanting  supper,  I  don’t  doubt.  As 
soon  as  may  be.  This  way  now!’ 

He  led  them  a  short  way  down  a  passage,  and  opened 
a  door.  ‘Here  is  a  nice  little  parlour!’  he  said.  ‘I  hope  it  will 
suit.  Excuse  me  now.  I’m  that  busy.  No  time  for  talking.  I 
must  be  trotting.  It’s  hard  work  for  two  legs,  but  I  don’t  get 
thinner.  I’ll  look  in  again  later.  If  you  want  anything,  ring  the 
hand-bell,  and  Nob  will  come.  If  he  don’t  come,  ring  and 
shout!’ 

Off  he  went  at  last,  and  left  them  feeling  rather  breathless. 
He  seemed  capable  of  an  endless  stream  of  talk,  however 
busy  he  might  be.  They  found  themselves  in  a  small  and  cosy 
room.  There  was  a  bit  of  bright  fire  burning  on  the  hearth, 
and  in  front  of  it  were  some  low  and  comfortable  chairs. 
There  was  a  round  table,  already  spread  with  a  white  cloth, 
and  on  it  was  a  large  hand-bell.  But  Nob,  the  hobbit  servant, 
came  bustling  in  long  before  they  thought  of  ringing.  He 
brought  candles  and  a  tray  full  of  plates. 

‘Will  you  be  wanting  anything  to  drink,  masters?’  he  asked. 
‘And  shall  I  show  you  the  bedrooms,  while  your  supper  is 
got  ready?’ 

They  were  washed  and  in  the  middle  of  good  deep  mugs 
of  beer  when  Mr.  Butterbur  and  Nob  came  in  again.  In  a 
twinkling  the  table  was  laid.  There  was  hot  soup,  cold  meats, 
a  blackberry  tart,  new  loaves,  slabs  of  butter,  and  half  a  ripe 
cheese:  good  plain  food,  as  good  as  the  Shire  could  show, 


202 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


and  homelike  enough  to  dispel  the  last  of  Sam’s  misgivings 
(already  much  relieved  by  the  excellence  of  the  beer) . 

The  landlord  hovered  round  for  a  little,  and  then  prepared 
to  leave  them.  ‘I  don’t  know  whether  you  would  care  to  join 
the  company,  when  you  have  supped,’  he  said,  standing 
at  the  door.  ‘Perhaps  you  would  rather  go  to  your  beds.  Still 
the  company  would  be  very  pleased  to  welcome  you,  if 
you  had  a  mind.  We  don’t  get  Outsiders  -  travellers  from 
the  Shire,  I  should  say,  begging  your  pardon  -  often;  and  we 
like  to  hear  a  bit  of  news,  or  any  story  or  song  you  may 
have  in  mind.  But  as  you  please!  Ring  the  bell,  if  you  lack 
anything!’ 

So  refreshed  and  encouraged  did  they  feel  at  the  end  of 
their  supper  (about  three  quarters  of  an  hour’s  steady  going, 
not  hindered  by  unnecessary  talk)  that  Frodo,  Pippin,  and 
Sam  decided  to  join  the  company.  Merry  said  it  would  be 
too  stuffy.  ‘I  shall  sit  here  quietly  by  the  fire  for  a  bit,  and 
perhaps  go  out  later  for  a  sniff  of  the  air.  Mind  your  Ps  and 
Qs,  and  don’t  forget  that  you  are  supposed  to  be  escaping  in 
secret,  and  are  still  on  the  high-road  and  not  very  far  from 
the  Shire!’ 

‘All  right!’  said  Pippin.  ‘Mind  yourself!  Don’t  get  lost,  and 
don’t  forget  that  it  is  safer  indoors!’ 

The  company  was  in  the  big  common-room  of  the  inn. 
The  gathering  was  large  and  mixed,  as  Frodo  discovered, 
when  his  eyes  got  used  to  the  light.  This  came  chiefly  from 
a  blazing  log-fire,  for  the  three  lamps  hanging  from  the  beams 
were  dim,  and  half  veiled  in  smoke.  Barliman  Butterbur  was 
standing  near  the  fire,  talking  to  a  couple  of  dwarves  and  one 
or  two  strange -looking  men.  On  the  benches  were  various 
folic:  men  of  Bree,  a  collection  of  local  hobbits  (sitting 
chattering  together),  a  few  more  dwarves,  and  other  vague 
figures  difficult  to  make  out  away  in  the  shadows  and  corners. 

As  soon  as  the  Shire -hobbits  entered,  there  was  a  chorus 
of  welcome  from  the  Bree-landers.  The  strangers,  especially 
those  that  had  come  up  the  Greenway,  stared  at  them 


AT  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  PRANCING  PONY  203 

curiously.  The  landlord  introduced  the  newcomers  to  the 
Bree-folk,  so  quickly  that,  though  they  caught  many  names, 
they  were  seldom  sure  who  the  names  belonged  to.  The  Men 
of  Bree  seemed  all  to  have  rather  botanical  (and  to  the  Shire- 
folk  rather  odd)  names,  like  Rushlight,  Goatleaf,  Heather- 
toes,  Appledore,  Thistlewool  and  Ferny  (not  to  mention 
Butterbur).  Some  of  the  hobbits  had  similar  names.  The 
Mugworts,  for  instance,  seemed  numerous.  But  most  of  them 
had  natural  names,  such  as  Banks,  Brockhouse,  Longholes, 
Sandheaver,  and  Tunnelly,  many  of  which  were  used  in  the 
Shire.  There  were  several  Underhills  from  Staddle,  and  as 
they  could  not  imagine  sharing  a  name  without  being  related, 
they  took  Frodo  to  their  hearts  as  a  long-lost  cousin. 

The  Bree-hobbits  were,  in  fact,  friendly  and  inquisitive, 
and  Frodo  soon  found  that  some  explanation  of  what  he  was 
doing  would  have  to  be  given.  He  gave  out  that  he  was 
interested  in  history  and  geography  (at  which  there  was  much 
wagging  of  heads,  although  neither  of  these  words  were 
much  used  in  the  Bree-dialect) .  He  said  he  was  thinking  of 
writing  a  book  (at  which  there  was  silent  astonishment),  and 
that  he  and  his  friends  wanted  to  collect  information  about 
hobbits  living  outside  the  Shire,  especially  in  the  eastern 
lands. 

At  this  a  chorus  of  voices  broke  out.  If  Frodo  had  really 
wanted  to  write  a  book,  and  had  had  many  ears,  he  would 
have  learned  enough  for  several  chapters  in  a  few  minutes. 
And  if  that  was  not  enough,  he  was  given  a  whole  list  of 
names,  beginning  with  ‘Old  Barliman  here’,  to  whom  he 
could  go  for  further  information.  But  after  a  time,  as  Frodo 
did  not  show  any  sign  of  writing  a  book  on  the  spot,  the 
hobbits  returned  to  their  questions  about  doings  in  the 
Shire.  Frodo  did  not  prove  very  communicative,  and  he  soon 
found  himself  sitting  alone  in  a  corner,  listening  and  looking 
around. 

The  Men  and  Dwarves  were  mostly  talking  of  distant 
events  and  telling  news  of  a  kind  that  was  becoming  only  too 
familiar.  There  was  trouble  away  in  the  South,  and  it  seemed 


204  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

that  the  Men  who  had  come  up  the  Greenway  were  on  the 
move,  looking  for  lands  where  they  could  find  some  peace. 
The  Bree-folk  were  sympathetic,  but  plainly  not  very  ready 
to  take  a  large  number  of  strangers  into  their  little  land.  One 
of  the  travellers,  a  squint-eyed  ill-favoured  fellow,  was  fore¬ 
telling  that  more  and  more  people  would  be  coming  north  in 
the  near  future.  ‘If  room  isn’t  found  for  them,  they’ll  find  it 
for  themselves.  They’ve  a  right  to  live,  same  as  other  folk,’ 
he  said  loudly.  The  local  inhabitants  did  not  look  pleased  at 
the  prospect. 

The  hobbits  did  not  pay  much  attention  to  all  this,  as  it 
did  not  at  the  moment  seem  to  concern  hobbits.  Big  Folk 
could  hardly  beg  for  lodgings  in  hobbit-holes.  They  were 
more  interested  in  Sam  and  Pippin,  who  were  now  feeling 
quite  at  home,  and  were  chatting  gaily  about  events  in  the 
Shire.  Pippin  roused  a  good  deal  of  laughter  with  an  account 
of  the  collapse  of  the  roof  of  the  Town  Hole  in  Michel 
Delving:  Will  Whitfoot,  the  Mayor,  and  the  fattest  hobbit  in 
the  Westfarthing,  had  been  buried  in  chalk,  and  came  out 
like  a  floured  dumpling.  But  there  were  several  questions 
asked  that  made  Frodo  a  little  uneasy.  One  of  the  Bree- 
landers,  who  seemed  to  have  been  in  the  Shire  several  times, 
wanted  to  know  where  the  Underhills  lived  and  who  they 
were  related  to. 

Suddenly  Frodo  noticed  that  a  strange-looking  weather¬ 
beaten  man,  sitting  in  the  shadows  near  the  wall,  was  also 
listening  intently  to  the  hobbit-talk.  He  had  a  tall  tankard  in 
front  of  him,  and  was  smoking  a  long-stemmed  pipe  curiously 
carved.  His  legs  were  stretched  out  before  him,  showing  high 
boots  of  supple  leather  that  fitted  him  well,  but  had  seen 
much  wear  and  were  now  caked  with  mud.  A  travel-stained 
cloak  of  heavy  dark-green  cloth  was  drawn  close  about  him, 
and  in  spite  of  the  heat  of  the  room  he  wore  a  hood  that 
overshadowed  his  face;  but  the  gleam  of  his  eyes  could  be 
seen  as  he  watched  the  hobbits. 

Who  is  that?’  Frodo  asked,  when  he  got  a  chance  to  whis¬ 
per  to  Mr.  Butterbur.  ‘I  don’t  think  you  introduced  him?’ 


AT  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  PRANCING  PONY  205 

‘Him?’  said  the  landlord  in  an  answering  whisper,  cocking 
an  eye  without  turning  his  head.  ‘I  don’t  rightly  know.  He  is 
one  of  the  wandering  folk  -  Rangers  we  call  them.  He  seldom 
talks:  not  but  what  he  can  tell  a  rare  tale  when  he  has  the 
mind.  He  disappears  for  a  month,  or  a  year,  and  then  he 
pops  up  again.  He  was  in  and  out  pretty  often  last  spring; 
but  I  haven’t  seen  him  about  lately.  What  his  right  name  is 
I’ve  never  heard:  but  he’s  known  round  here  as  Strider.  Goes 
about  at  a  great  pace  on  his  long  shanks;  though  he  don’t  tell 
nobody  what  cause  he  has  to  hurry.  But  there’s  no  accounting 
for  East  and  West,  as  we  say  in  Bree,  meaning  the  Rangers 
and  the  Shire-folk,  begging  your  pardon.  Funny  you  should 
ask  about  him.’  But  at  that  moment  Mr.  Butterbur  was  called 
away  by  a  demand  for  more  ale  and  his  last  remark  remained 
unexplained. 

Frodo  found  that  Strider  was  now  looking  at  him,  as  if  he 
had  heard  or  guessed  all  that  had  been  said.  Presently,  with 
a  wave  of  his  hand  and  a  nod,  he  invited  Frodo  to  come  over 
and  sit  by  him.  As  Frodo  drew  near  he  threw  back  his  hood, 
showing  a  shaggy  head  of  dark  hair  flecked  with  grey,  and  in 
a  pale  stern  face  a  pair  of  keen  grey  eyes. 

‘I  am  called  Strider,’  he  said  in  a  low  voice.  ‘I  am  very 
pleased  to  meet  you,  Master  -  Underhill,  if  old  Butterbur  got 
your  name  right.’ 

‘He  did,’  said  Frodo  stiffly.  He  felt  far  from  comfortable 
under  the  stare  of  those  keen  eyes. 

Well,  Master  Underhill,’  said  Strider,  ‘if  I  were  you,  I 
should  stop  your  young  friends  from  talking  too  much.  Drink, 
fire,  and  chance-meeting  are  pleasant  enough,  but,  well  -  this 
isn’t  the  Shire.  There  are  queer  folk  about.  Though  I  say  it 
as  shouldn’t,  you  may  think,’  he  added  with  a  wry  smile, 
seeing  Frodo’s  glance.  ‘And  there  have  been  even  stranger 
travellers  through  Bree  lately,’  he  went  on,  watching  Frodo’s 
face. 

Frodo  returned  his  gaze  but  said  nothing;  and  Strider  made 
no  further  sign.  His  attention  seemed  suddenly  to  be  fixed  on 
Pippin.  To  his  alarm  Frodo  became  aware  that  the  ridiculous 


206 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


young  Took,  encouraged  by  his  success  with  the  fat  Mayor  of 
Michel  Delving,  was  now  actually  giving  a  comic  account  of 
Bilbo’s  farewell  party.  He  was  already  giving  an  imitation 
of  the  Speech,  and  was  drawing  near  to  the  astonishing 
Disappearance. 

Frodo  was  annoyed.  It  was  a  harmless  enough  tale  for  most 
of  the  local  hobbits,  no  doubt:  just  a  funny  story  about  those 
funny  people  away  beyond  the  River;  but  some  (old 
Butterbur,  for  instance)  knew  a  thing  or  two,  and  had  prob¬ 
ably  heard  rumours  long  ago  about  Bilbo’s  vanishing.  It 
would  bring  the  name  of  Baggins  to  their  minds,  especially  if 
there  had  been  inquiries  in  Bree  after  that  name. 

Frodo  fidgeted,  wondering  what  to  do.  Pippin  was  evi¬ 
dently  much  enjoying  the  attention  he  was  getting,  and  had 
become  quite  forgetful  of  their  danger.  Frodo  had  a  sudden 
fear  that  in  his  present  mood  he  might  even  mention  the 
Ring;  and  that  might  well  be  disastrous. 

‘You  had  better  do  something  quick!’  whispered  Strider  in 
his  ear. 

Frodo  jumped  up  and  stood  on  a  table,  and  began  to  talk. 
The  attention  of  Pippin’s  audience  was  disturbed.  Some  of 
the  hobbits  looked  at  Frodo  and  laughed  and  clapped,  think¬ 
ing  that  Mr.  Underhill  had  taken  as  much  ale  as  was  good 
for  him. 

Frodo  suddenly  felt  very  foolish,  and  found  himself  (as 
was  his  habit  when  making  a  speech)  fingering  the  things  in 
his  pocket.  He  felt  the  Ring  on  its  chain,  and  quite  unac¬ 
countably  the  desire  came  over  him  to  slip  it  on  and  vanish 
out  of  the  silly  situation.  It  seemed  to  him,  somehow,  as  if 
the  suggestion  came  to  him  from  outside,  from  someone  or 
something  in  the  room.  He  resisted  the  temptation  firmly, 
and  clasped  the  Ring  in  his  hand,  as  if  to  keep  a  hold  on  it 
and  prevent  it  from  escaping  or  doing  any  mischief.  At  any 
rate  it  gave  him  no  inspiration.  He  spoke  ‘a  few  suitable 
words’,  as  they  would  have  said  in  the  Shire:  We  are  all  very 
much  gratified  by  the  kindness  of  your  reception,  and  I  venture 
to  hope  that  my  brief  visit  will  help  to  renew  the  old  ties  of 


AT  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  PRANCING  PONY  207 

friendship  between  the  Shire  and  Bree;  and  then  he  hesitated 
and  coughed. 

Everyone  in  the  room  was  now  looking  at  him.  ‘A  song!’ 
shouted  one  of  the  hobbits.  ‘A  song!  A  song!’  shouted  all  the 
others.  ‘Come  on  now,  master,  sing  us  something  that  we 
haven’t  heard  before!’ 

For  a  moment  Frodo  stood  gaping.  Then  in  desperation 
he  began  a  ridiculous  song  that  Bilbo  had  been  rather  fond 
of  (and  indeed  rather  proud  of,  for  he  had  made  up  the  words 
himself).  It  was  about  an  inn;  and  that  is  probably  why  it 
came  into  Frodo’s  mind  just  then.  Here  it  is  in  full.  Only  a 
few  words  of  it  are  now,  as  a  rule,  remembered. 

There  is  an  inn,  a  merry  old  inn 
beneath  an  old  grey  hill, 

And  there  they  brew  a  beer  so  brown 
That  the  Man  in  the  Moon  himself  came  down 
one  night  to  drink  his  fill. 

The  ostler  has  a  tipsy  cat 

that  plays  a  five-stringed  fiddle; 

And  np  and  down  he  runs  his  bow, 

Now  squeaking  high,  now  purring  low, 
now  sawing  in  the  middle. 

The  landlord  keeps  a  little  dog 
that  is  mighty  fond  of  jokes; 

When  there’s  good  cheer  among  the  guests, 

He  cocks  an  ear  at  all  the  jests 
and  laughs  until  he  chokes. 

They  also  keep  a  horned  cow 
as  proud  as  any  queen; 

But  music  turns  her  head  like  ale, 

And  makes  her  wave  her  tufted  tail 
and  dance  upon  the  green. 


208 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


And  O!  the  rows  of  silver  dishes 
and  the  store  of  silver  spoons! 

For  Sunday*  there’s  a  special  pair, 

And  these  they  polish  up  with  care 
on  Saturday  afternoons. 

The  Man  in  the  Moon  was  drinking  deep, 
and  the  cat  began  to  wail; 

A  dish  and  a  spoon  on  the  table  danced, 

The  cow  in  the  garden  madly  pranced, 
and  the  little  dog  chased  his  tail. 

The  Man  in  the  Moon  took  another  mug, 
and  then  rolled  beneath  his  chair; 

And  there  he  dozed  and  dreamed  of  ale, 

Till  in  the  sky  the  stars  were  pale, 
and  dawn  was  in  the  air. 

Then  the  ostler  said  to  his  tipsy  cat: 

‘ The  white  horses  of  the  Moon, 

They  neigh  and  champ  their  silver  bits; 

But  their  master’s  been  and  drowned  his  wits, 
and  the  Sun’ll  be  rising  soon!’ 

So  the  cat  on  his  fiddle  played  hey-diddle-diddle, 
a  jig  that  would  wake  the  dead: 

He  squeaked  and  sawed  and  quickened  the  tune, 
While  the  landlord  shook  the  Man  in  the  Moon: 

‘ It’s  after  three!’  he  said. 

They  rolled  the  Man  slowly  up  the  hill 
and  bundled  him  into  the  Moon, 

While  his  horses  galloped  up  in  rear, 

And  the  cow  came  capering  like  a  deer, 
and  a  dish  ran  up  with  the  spoon. 


*  See  note  2,  III,  p.  1462 


AT  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  PRANCING  PONY  209 

Now  quicker  the  fiddle  went  deedle-dum-diddle; 
the  dog  began  to  roar, 

The  cow  and  the  horses  stood  on  their  heads; 

The  guests  all  bounded  from  their  beds 
and  danced  upon  the  floor. 

With  a  ping  and  a  pong  the  fiddle-strings  broke! 
the  cow  jumped  over  the  Moon, 

And  the  little  dog  laughed  to  see  such  fun, 

And  the  Saturday  dish  went  off  at  a  run 
with  the  silver  Sunday  spoon. 

The  round  Moon  rolled  behind  the  hill 
as  the  Sun  raised  up  her  head. 

She*  hardly  believed  her  fiery  eyes; 

For  though  it  was  day,  to  her  surprise 
they  all  went  back  to  bed! 

There  was  loud  and  long  applause.  Frodo  had  a  good 
voice,  and  the  song  tickled  their  fancy.  ‘Where’s  old  Barley?’ 
they  cried.  ‘He  ought  to  hear  this.  Bob  ought  to  learn  his  cat 
the  fiddle,  and  then  we’d  have  a  dance.’  They  called  for  more 
ale,  and  began  to  shout:  ‘Let’s  have  it  again,  master!  Come 
on  now!  Once  more!’ 

They  made  Frodo  have  another  drink,  and  then  begin  his 
song  again,  while  many  of  them  joined  in;  for  the  tune  was 
well  known,  and  they  were  quick  at  picking  up  words.  It  was 
now  Frodo’s  turn  to  feel  pleased  with  himself.  He  capered 
about  on  the  table;  and  when  he  came  a  second  time  to  the 
cow  jumped  over  the  Moon ,  he  leaped  in  the  air.  Much  too 
vigorously;  for  he  came  down,  bang,  into  a  tray  full  of  mugs, 
and  slipped,  and  rolled  off  the  table  with  a  crash,  clatter, 
and  bump!  The  audience  all  opened  their  mouths  wide  for 
laughter,  and  stopped  short  in  gaping  silence;  for  the  singer 


Elves  (and  Hobbits)  always  refer  to  the  Sun  as  She. 


210 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


disappeared.  He  simply  vanished,  as  if  he  had  gone  slap 
through  the  floor  without  leaving  a  hole! 

The  local  hobbits  stared  in  amazement,  and  then  sprang 
to  their  feet  and  shouted  for  Barliman.  All  the  company  drew 
away  from  Pippin  and  Sam,  who  found  themselves  left  alone 
in  a  corner,  and  eyed  darkly  and  doubtfully  from  a  distance. 
It  was  plain  that  many  people  regarded  them  now  as  the 
companions  of  a  travelling  magician  of  unknown  powers  and 
purpose.  But  there  was  one  swarthy  Bree-lander,  who  stood 
looking  at  them  with  a  knowing  and  half-mocking  expression 
that  made  them  feel  very  uncomfortable.  Presently  he  slipped 
out  of  the  door,  followed  by  the  squint-eyed  southerner:  the 
two  had  been  whispering  together  a  good  deal  during  the 
evening. 

Frodo  felt  a  fool.  Not  knowing  what  else  to  do,  he  crawled 
away  under  the  tables  to  the  dark  corner  by  Strider,  who  sat 
unmoved,  giving  no  sign  of  his  thoughts.  Frodo  leaned  back 
against  the  wall  and  took  off  the  Ring.  How  it  came  to  be  on 
his  finger  he  could  not  tell.  He  could  only  suppose  that  he 
had  been  handling  it  in  his  pocket  while  he  sang,  and  that 
somehow  it  had  slipped  on  when  he  stuck  out  his  hand  with 
a  jerk  to  save  his  fall.  For  a  moment  he  wondered  if  the  Ring 
itself  had  not  played  him  a  trick;  perhaps  it  had  tried  to  reveal 
itself  in  response  to  some  wish  or  command  that  was  felt  in 
the  room.  He  did  not  like  the  looks  of  the  men  that  had  gone 
out. 

‘Well?’  said  Strider,  when  he  reappeared.  Why  did  you  do 
that?  Worse  than  anything  your  friends  could  have  said!  You 
have  put  your  foot  in  it!  Or  should  I  say  your  finger?’ 

‘I  don’t  know  what  you  mean,’  said  Frodo,  annoyed  and 
alarmed. 

‘Oh  yes,  you  do,’  answered  Strider;  ‘but  we  had  better  wait 
until  the  uproar  has  died  down.  Then,  if  you  please,  Mr. 
Baggins,  I  should  like  a  quiet  word  with  you.’ 

What  about?’  asked  Frodo,  ignoring  the  sudden  use  of  his 
proper  name. 

‘A  matter  of  some  importance  -  to  us  both,’  answered 


AT  THE  SIGN  OF  THE  PRANCING  PONY 


21 1 


Strider,  looking  Frodo  in  the  eye.  ‘You  may  hear  something 
to  your  advantage.’ 

‘Very  well,’  said  Frodo,  trying  to  appear  unconcerned.  ‘I’ll 
talk  to  you  later.’ 

Meanwhile  an  argument  was  going  on  by  the  fireplace.  Mr. 
Butterbur  had  come  trotting  in,  and  he  was  now  trying  to 
listen  to  several  conflicting  accounts  of  the  event  at  the  same 
time. 

‘I  saw  him,  Mr.  Butterbur,’  said  a  hobbit;  ‘or  leastways  I 
didn’t  see  him,  if  you  take  my  meaning.  He  just  vanished  into 
thin  air,  in  a  manner  of  speaking.’ 

‘You  don’t  say,  Mr.  Mugwort!’  said  the  landlord,  looking 
puzzled. 

‘Yes  I  do!’  replied  Mugwort.  ‘And  I  mean  what  I  say, 
what’s  more.’ 

‘There’s  some  mistake  somewhere,’  said  Butterbur,  shak¬ 
ing  his  head.  ‘There  was  too  much  of  that  Mr.  Underhill  to 
go  vanishing  into  thin  air;  or  into  thick  air,  as  is  more  likely 
in  this  room.’ 

‘Well,  where  is  he  now?’  cried  several  voices. 

‘How  should  I  know?  He’s  welcome  to  go  where  he  will, 
so  long  as  he  pays  in  the  morning.  There’s  Mr.  Took,  now: 
he’s  not  vanished.’ 

‘Well,  I  saw  what  I  saw,  and  I  saw  what  I  didn’t,’  said 
Mugwort  obstinately. 

‘And  I  say  there’s  some  mistake,’  repeated  Butterbur, 
picking  up  the  tray  and  gathering  up  the  broken  crockery. 

‘Of  course  there’s  a  mistake!’  said  Frodo.  ‘I  haven’t  van¬ 
ished.  Here  I  am!  I’ve  just  been  having  a  few  words  with 
Strider  in  the  corner.’ 

He  came  forward  into  the  firelight;  but  most  of  the  com¬ 
pany  backed  away,  even  more  perturbed  than  before.  They 
were  not  in  the  least  satisfied  by  his  explanation  that  he  had 
crawled  away  quickly  under  the  tables  after  he  had  fallen. 
Most  of  the  Hobbits  and  the  Men  of  Bree  went  off  then  and 
there  in  a  huff,  having  no  fancy  for  further  entertainment  that 


212 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


evening.  One  or  two  gave  Frodo  a  black  look  and  departed 
muttering  among  themselves.  The  Dwarves  and  the  two  or 
three  strange  Men  that  still  remained  got  up  and  said  good 
night  to  the  landlord,  but  not  to  Frodo  and  his  friends.  Before 
long  no  one  was  left  but  Strider,  who  sat  on,  unnoticed,  by 
the  wall. 

Mr.  Butterbur  did  not  seem  much  put  out.  He  reckoned, 
very  probably,  that  his  house  would  be  full  again  on  many 
future  nights,  until  the  present  mystery  had  been  thoroughly 
discussed.  ‘Now  what  have  you  been  doing,  Mr.  Underhill?’ 
he  asked.  ‘Frightening  my  customers  and  breaking  up  my 
crocks  with  your  acrobatics!’ 

‘I  am  very  sorry  to  have  caused  any  trouble,’  said  Frodo. 
‘It  was  quite  unintentional,  I  assure  you.  A  most  unfortunate 
accident.’ 

‘All  right,  Mr.  Underhill!  But  if  you’re  going  to  do  any 
more  tumbling,  or  conjuring,  or  whatever  it  was,  you’d  best 
warn  folk  beforehand  -  and  warn  me.  We’re  a  bit  suspicious 
round  here  of  anything  out  of  the  way  -  uncanny,  if  you 
understand  me;  and  we  don’t  take  to  it  all  of  a  sudden.’ 

‘I  shan’t  be  doing  anything  of  the  sort  again,  Mr.  Butterbur, 
I  promise  you.  And  now  I  think  I’ll  be  getting  to  bed.  We 
shall  be  making  an  early  start.  Will  you  see  that  our  ponies 
are  ready  by  eight  o’clock?’ 

‘Very  good!  But  before  you  go,  I  should  like  a  word  with 
you  in  private,  Mr.  Underhill.  Something  has  just  come  back 
to  my  mind  that  I  ought  to  tell  you.  I  hope  that  you’ll  not 
take  it  amiss.  When  I’ve  seen  to  a  thing  or  two,  I’ll  come 
along  to  your  room,  if  you’re  willing.’ 

‘Certainly!’  said  Frodo;  but  his  heart  sank.  He  wondered 
how  many  private  talks  he  would  have  before  he  got  to  bed, 
and  what  they  would  reveal.  Were  these  people  all  in  league 
against  him?  He  began  to  suspect  even  old  Butterbur’s  fat 
face  of  concealing  dark  designs. 


Chapter  io 


STRIDER 


Frodo,  Pippin,  and  Sam  made  their  way  back  to  the  parlour. 
There  was  no  light.  Merry  was  not  there,  and  the  fire  had 
burned  low.  It  was  not  until  they  had  puffed  up  the  embers 
into  a  blaze  and  thrown  on  a  couple  of  faggots  that  they 
discovered  Strider  had  come  with  them.  There  he  was  calmly 
sitting  in  a  chair  by  the  door! 

‘Hallo!’  said  Pippin.  ‘Who  are  you,  and  what  do  you  want?’ 

‘I  am  called  Strider,’  he  answered;  ‘and  though  he  may 
have  forgotten  it,  your  friend  promised  to  have  a  quiet  talk 
with  me.’ 

‘You  said  I  might  hear  something  to  my  advantage,  I 
believe,’  said  Frodo.  ‘What  have  you  to  say?’ 

‘Several  things,’  answered  Strider.  ‘But,  of  course,  I  have 
my  price.’ 

What  do  you  mean?’  asked  Frodo  sharply. 

‘Don’t  be  alarmed!  I  mean  just  this:  I  will  tell  you  what 
I  know,  and  give  you  some  good  advice  -  but  I  shall  want  a 
reward.’ 

‘And  what  will  that  be,  pray?’  said  Frodo.  He  suspected 
now  that  he  had  fallen  in  with  a  rascal,  and  he  thought 
uncomfortably  that  he  had  brought  only  a  little  money  with 
him.  All  of  it  would  hardly  satisfy  a  rogue,  and  he  could  not 
spare  any  of  it. 

‘No  more  than  you  can  afford,’  answered  Strider  with  a 
slow  smile,  as  if  he  guessed  Frodo’s  thoughts.  ‘Just  this:  you 
must  take  me  along  with  you,  until  I  wish  to  leave  you.’ 

‘Oh,  indeed!’  replied  Frodo,  surprised,  but  not  much 
relieved.  ‘Even  if  I  wanted  another  companion,  I  should  not 
agree  to  any  such  thing,  until  I  knew  a  good  deal  more  about 
you,  and  your  business.’ 


214 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Excellent!’  exclaimed  Strider,  crossing  his  legs  and  sitting 
back  comfortably.  ‘You  seem  to  be  coming  to  your  senses 
again,  and  that  is  all  to  the  good.  You  have  been  much  too 
careless  so  far.  Very  well!  I  will  tell  you  what  I  know,  and 
leave  the  reward  to  you.  You  may  be  glad  to  grant  it,  when 
you  have  heard  me.’ 

‘Go  on  then!’  said  Frodo.  ‘What  do  you  know?’ 

‘Too  much;  too  many  dark  things,’  said  Strider  grimly. 

‘But  as  for  your  business - ’  He  got  up  and  went  to  the 

door,  opened  it  quickly  and  looked  out.  Then  he  shut  it 
quietly  and  sat  down  again.  ‘I  have  quick  ears,’  he  went  on, 
lowering  his  voice,  ‘and  though  I  cannot  disappear,  I  have 
hunted  many  wild  and  wary  things  and  I  can  usually  avoid 
being  seen,  if  I  wish.  Now,  I  was  behind  the  hedge  this 
evening  on  the  Road  west  of  Bree,  when  four  hobbits  came 
out  of  the  Downlands.  I  need  not  repeat  all  that  they  said  to 
old  Bombadil  or  to  one  another;  but  one  thing  interested  me. 
Please  remember ,  said  one  of  them,  that  the  name  Baggins  must 
not  be  mentioned.  I  am  Mr.  Underhill,  if  any  name  must  be 
given.  That  interested  me  so  much  that  I  followed  them  here. 
I  slipped  over  the  gate  just  behind  them.  Maybe  Mr.  Baggins 
has  an  honest  reason  for  leaving  his  name  behind;  but  if  so, 
I  should  advise  him  and  his  friends  to  be  more  careful.’ 

‘I  don’t  see  what  interest  my  name  has  for  anyone  in  Bree,’ 
said  Frodo  angrily,  ‘and  I  have  still  to  learn  why  it  interests 
you.  Mr.  Strider  may  have  an  honest  reason  for  spying  and 
eavesdropping;  but  if  so,  I  should  advise  him  to  explain  it.  ’ 

‘Well  answered!’  said  Strider  laughing.  ‘But  the  explanation 
is  simple:  I  was  looking  for  a  Hobbit  called  Frodo  Baggins.  I 
wanted  to  find  him  quickly.  I  had  learned  that  he  was  carrying 
out  of  the  Shire,  well,  a  secret  that  concerned  me  and  my 
friends. 

‘Now,  don’t  mistake  me!’  he  cried,  as  Frodo  rose  from  his 
seat,  and  Sam  jumped  up  with  a  scowl.  ‘I  shall  take  more 
care  of  the  secret  than  you  do.  And  care  is  needed!’  He  leaned 
forward  and  looked  at  them.  Watch  every  shadow!’  he  said 
in  a  low  voice.  ‘Black  horsemen  have  passed  through  Bree. 


STRIDER 


215 


On  Monday  one  came  down  the  Greenway,  they  say;  and 
another  appeared  later,  coming  up  the  Greenway  from  the 
south.’ 

There  was  a  silence.  At  last  Frodo  spoke  to  Pippin  and 
Sam:  ‘I  ought  to  have  guessed  it  from  the  way  the  gatekeeper 
greeted  us,’  he  said.  ‘And  the  landlord  seems  to  have  heard 
something.  Why  did  he  press  us  to  join  the  company?  And 
why  on  earth  did  we  behave  so  foolishly:  we  ought  to  have 
stayed  quiet  in  here.’ 

‘It  would  have  been  better,’  said  Strider.  ‘I  would  have 
stopped  your  going  into  the  common-room,  if  I  could;  but 
the  innkeeper  would  not  let  me  in  to  see  you,  or  take  a 
message.’ 

‘Do  you  think  he - ’  began  Frodo. 

‘No,  I  don’t  think  any  harm  of  old  Butterbur.  Only  he  does 
not  altogether  like  mysterious  vagabonds  of  my  sort.’  Frodo 
gave  him  a  puzzled  look.  ‘Well,  I  have  rather  a  rascally  look, 
have  I  not?’  said  Strider  with  a  curl  of  his  lip  and  a  queer 
gleam  in  his  eye.  ‘But  I  hope  we  shall  get  to  know  one  another 
better.  When  we  do,  I  hope  you  will  explain  what  happened 
at  the  end  of  your  song.  For  that  little  prank - ’ 

‘It  was  sheer  accident!’  interrupted  Frodo. 

‘I  wonder,’  said  Strider.  ‘Accident,  then.  That  accident  has 
made  your  position  dangerous.’ 

‘Hardly  more  than  it  was  already,’  said  Frodo.  ‘I  knew 
these  horsemen  were  pursuing  me;  but  now  at  any  rate  they 
seem  to  have  missed  me  and  to  have  gone  away.’ 

‘You  must  not  count  on  that!’  said  Strider  sharply.  ‘They 
will  return.  And  more  are  coming.  There  are  others.  I  know 
their  number.  I  know  these  Riders.’  He  paused,  and  his  eyes 
were  cold  and  hard.  ‘And  there  are  some  folk  in  Bree  who 
are  not  to  be  trusted,’  he  went  on.  ‘Bill  Ferny,  for  instance. 
He  has  an  evil  name  in  the  Bree-land,  and  queer  folk  call  at 
his  house.  You  must  have  noticed  him  among  the  company: 
a  swarthy  sneering  fellow.  He  was  very  close  with  one  of  the 
Southern  strangers,  and  they  slipped  out  together  just  after 


216 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


your  “accident”.  Not  all  of  those  Southerners  mean  well;  and 
as  for  Ferny,  he  would  sell  anything  to  anybody;  or  make 
mischief  for  amusement.’ 

‘What  will  Ferny  sell,  and  what  has  my  accident  got  to  do 
with  him?’  said  Frodo,  still  determined  not  to  understand 
Strider’s  hints. 

‘News  of  you,  of  course,’  answered  Strider.  ‘An  account 
of  your  performance  would  be  very  interesting  to  certain 
people.  After  that  they  would  hardly  need  to  be  told  your  real 
name.  It  seems  to  me  only  too  likely  that  they  will  hear  of  it 
before  this  night  is  over.  Is  that  enough?  You  can  do  as  you 
like  about  my  reward:  take  me  as  a  guide  or  not.  But  I  may 
say  that  I  know  all  the  lands  between  the  Shire  and  the  Misty 
Mountains,  for  I  have  wandered  over  them  for  many  years. 
I  am  older  than  I  look.  I  might  prove  useful.  You  will  have 
to  leave  the  open  road  after  tonight;  for  the  horsemen  will 
watch  it  night  and  day.  You  may  escape  from  Bree,  and  be 
allowed  to  go  forward  while  the  Sun  is  up;  but  you  won’t  go 
far.  They  will  come  on  you  in  the  wild,  in  some  dark  place 
where  there  is  no  help.  Do  you  wish  them  to  find  you?  They 
are  terrible!’ 

The  hobbits  looked  at  him,  and  saw  with  surprise  that  his 
face  was  drawn  as  if  with  pain,  and  his  hands  clenched  the 
arms  of  his  chair.  The  room  was  very  quiet  and  still,  and  the 
light  seemed  to  have  grown  dim.  For  a  while  he  sat  with 
unseeing  eyes  as  if  walking  in  distant  memory  or  listening  to 
sounds  in  the  Night  far  away. 

‘There!’  he  cried  after  a  moment,  drawing  his  hand  across 
his  brow.  ‘Perhaps  I  know  more  about  these  pursuers  than 
you  do.  You  fear  them,  but  you  do  not  fear  them  enough, 
yet.  Tomorrow  you  will  have  to  escape,  if  you  can.  Strider 
can  take  you  by  paths  that  are  seldom  trodden.  Will  you  have 
him?’ 

There  was  a  heavy  silence.  Frodo  made  no  answer;  his 
mind  was  confused  with  doubt  and  fear.  Sam  frowned,  and 
looked  at  his  master;  and  at  last  he  broke  out: 

‘With  your  leave,  Mr.  Frodo,  I’d  say  no\  This  Strider  here, 


STRIDER 


217 


he  warns  and  he  says  take  care;  and  I  say  yes  to  that,  and  let’s 
begin  with  him.  He  comes  out  of  the  Wild,  and  I  never  heard 
no  good  of  such  folic.  He  knows  something,  that’s  plain,  and 
more  than  I  like;  but  it’s  no  reason  why  we  should  let  him 
go  leading  us  out  into  some  dark  place  far  from  help,  as  he 
puts  it.’ 

Pippin  fidgeted  and  looked  uncomfortable.  Strider  did  not 
reply  to  Sam,  but  turned  his  keen  eyes  on  Frodo.  Frodo 
caught  his  glance  and  looked  away.  ‘No,’  he  said  slowly.  ‘I 
don’t  agree.  I  think,  I  think  you  are  not  really  as  you  choose 
to  look.  You  began  to  talk  to  me  like  the  Bree-folk,  but  your 
voice  has  changed.  Still  Sam  seems  right  in  this:  I  don’t  see 
why  you  should  warn  us  to  take  care,  and  yet  ask  us  to  take 
you  on  trust.  Why  the  disguise?  Who  are  you?  What  do  you 
really  know  about  -  about  my  business;  and  how  do  you 
know  it?’ 

‘The  lesson  in  caution  has  been  well  learned,’  said  Strider 
with  a  grim  smile.  ‘But  caution  is  one  thing  and  wavering  is 
another.  You  will  never  get  to  Rivendell  now  on  your  own, 
and  to  trust  me  is  your  only  chance.  You  must  make  up  your 
mind.  I  will  answer  some  of  your  questions,  if  that  will  help 
you  to  do  so.  But  why  should  you  believe  my  story,  if  you 
do  not  trust  me  already?  Still  here  it  is - ’ 

At  that  moment  there  came  a  knock  at  the  door.  Mr. 
Butterbur  had  arrived  with  candles,  and  behind  him  was  Nob 
with  cans  of  hot  water.  Strider  withdrew  into  a  dark  corner. 

‘I’ve  come  to  bid  you  good  night,’  said  the  landlord,  putting 
the  candles  on  the  table.  ‘Nob!  Take  the  water  to  the  rooms!’ 
He  came  in  and  shut  the  door. 

‘It’s  like  this,’  he  began,  hesitating  and  looking  troubled.  ‘If 
I’ve  done  any  harm,  I’m  sorry  indeed.  But  one  thing  drives 
out  another,  as  you’ll  admit;  and  I’m  a  busy  man.  But  first  one 
thing  and  then  another  this  week  have  jogged  my  memory,  as 
the  saying  goes;  and  not  too  late  I  hope.  You  see,  I  was  asked 
to  look  out  for  hobbits  of  the  Shire,  and  for  one  by  the  name 
of  Baggins  in  particular.’ 


2l8 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘And  what  has  that  got  to  do  with  me?’  asked  Frodo. 

‘Ah!  you  know  best,’  said  the  landlord,  knowingly.  ‘I  won’t 
give  you  away;  but  I  was  told  that  this  Baggins  would  be 
going  by  the  name  of  Underhill,  and  I  was  given  a  description 
that  fits  you  well  enough,  if  I  may  say  so.’ 

‘Indeed!  Let’s  have  it  then!’  said  Frodo,  unwisely  inter¬ 
rupting. 

‘A  stout  little  fellow  with  red  cheeks ,’  said  Mr.  Butterbur 
solemnly.  Pippin  chuckled,  but  Sam  looked  indignant.  ‘  That 
won’t  help  you  much;  it  goes  for  most  hobbits,  Barley ,  he  says  to 
me,’  continued  Mr.  Butterbur  with  a  glance  at  Pippin.  ‘But 
this  one  is  taller  than  some  and  fairer  than  most,  and  he  has  a 
cleft  in  his  chin:  perky  chap  with  a  bright  eye.  Begging  your 
pardon,  but  he  said  it,  not  me.’ 

‘He  said  it?  And  who  was  he?’  asked  Frodo  eagerly. 

‘Ah!  That  was  Gandalf,  if  you  know  who  I  mean.  A  wizard 
they  say  he  is,  but  he’s  a  good  friend  of  mine,  whether  or  no. 
But  now  I  don’t  know  what  he’ll  have  to  say  to  me,  if  I  see 
him  again:  turn  all  my  ale  sour  or  me  into  a  block  of  wood,  I 
shouldn’t  wonder.  He’s  a  bit  hasty.  Still  what’s  done  can’t  be 
undone.’ 

‘Well,  what  have  you  done?’  said  Frodo,  getting  impatient 
with  the  slow  unravelling  of  Butterbur’s  thoughts. 

‘Where  was  I?’  said  the  landlord,  pausing  and  snapping  his 
fingers.  ‘Ah,  yes!  Old  Gandalf.  Three  months  back  he  walked 
right  into  my  room  without  a  knock.  Barley,  he  says,  I’m  off 
in  the  morning.  Will  you  do  something  for  me?  You’ve  only  to 
name  it,  I  said.  I’m  in  a  hurry,  said  he,  and  I’ve  no  time  myself, 
but  I  want  a  message  took  to  the  Shire.  Have  you  anyone  you 
can  send,  and  trust  to  go?  I  can  find  someone,  I  said,  tomorrow, 
maybe,  or  the  day  after.  Make  it  tomorrow,  he  says,  and  then 
he  gave  me  a  letter. 

‘It’s  addressed  plain  enough,’  said  Mr.  Butterbur,  pro¬ 
ducing  a  letter  from  his  pocket,  and  reading  out  the 
address  slowly  and  proudly  (he  valued  his  reputation  as  a 
lettered  man) : 


STRIDER 


219 


Mr.  FRODO  BAGGINS,  BAG  END,  HOBBITON 
in  the  SHIRE. 

‘A  letter  for  me  from  Gandalf !’  cried  Frodo. 

‘Ah!’  said  Mr.  Butterbur.  ‘Then  your  right  name  is 
Baggins?’ 

‘It  is,’  said  Frodo,  ‘and  you  had  better  give  me  that  letter 
at  once,  and  explain  why  you  never  sent  it.  That’s  what  you 
came  to  tell  me,  I  suppose,  though  you’ve  taken  a  long  time 
to  come  to  the  point.’ 

Poor  Mr.  Butterbur  looked  troubled.  ‘You’re  right,  master,’ 
he  said,  ‘and  I  beg  your  pardon.  And  I’m  mortal  afraid  of 
what  Gandalf  will  say,  if  harm  comes  of  it.  But  I  didn’t  keep 
it  back  a-purpose.  I  put  it  by  safe.  Then  I  couldn’t  find 
nobody  willing  to  go  to  the  Shire  next  day,  nor  the  day  after, 
and  none  of  my  own  folk  were  to  spare;  and  then  one  thing 
after  another  drove  it  out  of  my  mind.  I’m  a  busy  man.  I’ll 
do  what  I  can  to  set  matters  right,  and  if  there’s  any  help  I 
can  give,  you’ve  only  to  name  it. 

‘Leaving  the  letter  aside,  I  promised  Gandalf  no  less. 
Barley ,  he  says  to  me,  this  friend  of  mine  from  the  Shire,  he  may 
be  coming  out  this  way  before  long,  him  and  another.  He’ll  be 
calling  himself  Underhill.  Mind  that!  But  you  need  ask  no 
questions.  And  if  I’m  not  with  him,  he  may  be  in  trouble,  and  he 
may  need  help.  Do  whatever  you  can  for  him,  and  I’ll  be  grateful, 
he  says.  And  here  you  are,  and  trouble  is  not  far  off, 
seemingly.’ 

‘What  do  you  mean?’  asked  Frodo. 

‘These  black  men,’  said  the  landlord  lowering  his  voice. 
‘They’re  looking  for  Baggins,  and  if  they  mean  well,  then  I’m 
a  hobbit.  It  was  on  Monday,  and  all  the  dogs  were  yammering 
and  the  geese  screaming.  Uncanny,  I  called  it.  Nob,  he  came 
and  told  me  that  two  black  men  were  at  the  door  asking  for 
a  hobbit  called  Baggins.  Nob’s  hair  was  all  stood  on  end.  I 
bid  the  black  fellows  be  off,  and  slammed  the  door  on  them; 
but  they’ve  been  asking  the  same  question  all  the  way  to 
Archet,  I  hear.  And  that  Ranger,  Strider,  he’s  been  asking 


220 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


questions,  too.  Tried  to  get  in  here  to  see  you,  before  you’d 
had  bite  or  sup,  he  did.’ 

‘He  did!’  said  Strider  suddenly,  coming  forward  into  the 
light.  ‘And  much  trouble  would  have  been  saved,  if  you  had 
let  him  in,  Barliman.’ 

The  landlord  jumped  with  surprise.  ‘You!’  he  cried. 
‘You’re  always  popping  up.  What  do  you  want  now?’ 

‘He’s  here  with  my  leave,’  said  Frodo.  ‘He  came  to  offer 
me  his  help.’ 

‘Well,  you  know  your  own  business,  maybe,’  said  Mr. 
Butterbur,  looking  suspiciously  at  Strider.  ‘But  if  I  was  in 
your  plight,  I  wouldn’t  take  up  with  a  Ranger.’ 

‘Then  who  would  you  take  up  with?’  asked  Strider.  ‘A  fat 
innkeeper  who  only  remembers  his  own  name  because  people 
shout  it  at  him  all  day?  They  cannot  stay  in  The  Pony  for 
ever,  and  they  cannot  go  home.  They  have  a  long  road  before 
them.  Will  you  go  with  them  and  keep  the  black  men  off?’ 

‘Me?  Leave  Bree!  I  wouldn’t  do  that  for  any  money,’  said 
Mr.  Butterbur,  looking  really  scared.  ‘But  why  can’t  you  stay 
here  quiet  for  a  bit,  Mr.  Underhill?  What  are  all  these  queer 
goings  on?  What  are  these  black  men  after,  and  where  do 
they  come  from,  I’d  like  to  know?’ 

‘I’m  sorry  I  can’t  explain  it  all,’  answered  Frodo.  ‘I  am  tired 
and  very  worried,  and  it’s  a  long  tale.  But  if  you  mean  to  help 
me,  I  ought  to  warn  you  that  you  will  be  in  danger  as  long  as 
I  am  in  your  house.  These  Black  Riders:  I  am  not  sure,  but 
I  think,  I  fear  they  come  from - ’ 

‘They  come  from  Mordor,’  said  Strider  in  a  low  voice. 
‘From  Mordor,  Barliman,  if  that  means  anything  to  you.’ 

‘Save  us!’  cried  Mr.  Butterbur  turning  pale;  the  name  evi¬ 
dently  was  known  to  him.  ‘That  is  the  worst  news  that  has 
come  to  Bree  in  my  time.’ 

‘It  is,’  said  Frodo.  ‘Are  you  still  willing  to  help  me?’ 

‘I  am,’  said  Mr.  Butterbur.  ‘More  than  ever.  Though  I 

don’t  know  what  the  likes  of  me  can  do  against,  against - ’ 

he  faltered. 

‘Against  the  Shadow  in  the  East,’  said  Strider  quietly.  ‘Not 


STRIDER 


221 


much,  Barliman,  but  every  little  helps.  You  can  let  Mr. 
Underhill  stay  here  tonight,  as  Mr.  Underhill;  and  you  can 
forget  the  name  of  Baggins,  till  he  is  far  away.’ 

‘I’ll  do  that,’  said  Butterbur.  ‘But  they’ll  find  out  he’s  here 
without  help  from  me,  I’m  afraid.  It’s  a  pity  Mr.  Baggins 
drew  attention  to  himself  this  evening,  to  say  no  more.  The 
story  of  that  Mr.  Bilbo’s  going  off  has  been  heard  before 
tonight  in  Bree.  Even  our  Nob  has  been  doing  some  guessing 
in  his  slow  pate;  and  there  are  others  in  Bree  quicker  in  the 
uptake  than  he  is.’ 

‘Well,  we  can  only  hope  the  Riders  won’t  come  back  yet,’ 
said  Frodo. 

‘I  hope  not,  indeed,’  said  Butterbur.  ‘But  spooks  or  no 
spooks,  they  won’t  get  in  The  Pony  so  easy.  Don’t  you  worry 
till  the  morning.  Nob’ll  say  no  word.  No  black  man  shall  pass 
my  doors,  while  I  can  stand  on  my  legs.  Me  and  my  folk’ll  keep 
watch  tonight;  but  you  had  best  get  some  sleep,  if  you  can.’ 

‘In  any  case  we  must  be  called  at  dawn,’  said  Frodo.  ‘We 
must  get  off  as  early  as  possible.  Breakfast  at  six-thirty,  please.’ 

‘Right!  I’ll  see  to  the  orders,’  said  the  landlord.  ‘Good  night, 
Mr.  Baggins  -  Underhill,  I  should  say!  Good  night  -  now, 
bless  me!  Where’s  your  Mr.  Brandybuck?’ 

‘I  don’t  know,’  said  Frodo  with  sudden  anxiety.  They  had 
forgotten  all  about  Merry,  and  it  was  getting  late.  ‘I  am  afraid 
he  is  out.  He  said  something  about  going  for  a  breath  of  air.’ 

Well,  you  do  want  looking  after  and  no  mistake:  your  party 
might  be  on  a  holiday!’  said  Butterbur.  ‘I  must  go  and  bar 
the  doors  quick,  but  I’ll  see  your  friend  is  let  in  when  he 
comes.  I’d  better  send  Nob  to  look  for  him.  Good  night  to 
you  all!’  At  last  Mr.  Butterbur  went  out,  with  another  doubt¬ 
ful  look  at  Strider  and  a  shake  of  his  head.  His  footsteps 
retreated  down  the  passage. 

‘Well?’  said  Strider.  ‘When  are  you  going  to  open  that  letter?’ 
Frodo  looked  carefully  at  the  seal  before  he  broke  it.  It  seemed 
certainly  to  be  Gandalf’s.  Inside,  written  in  the  wizard’s 
strong  but  graceful  script,  was  the  following  message: 


222 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


THE  PRANCING  PONY,  BREE.  Midyear’s  Day,  Shire  Year, 
1418. 

Dear  Frodo, 

Bad  news  has  reached  me  here.  I  must  go  off  at  once.  You  had 
better  leave  Bag  End  soon,  and  get  out  of  the  Shire  before  the  end 
of  July  at  latest.  I  will  return  as  soon  as  I  can;  and  I  will  follow 
you,  if  I  find  that  you  are  gone.  Leave  a  message  for  me  here,  if 
you  pass  through  Bree.  You  can  trust  the  landlord  (Butterbur). 
You  may  meet  a  friend  of  mine  on  the  Road:  a  Man,  lean,  dark, 
tall,  by  some  called  Strider.  He  knows  our  business  and  will  help 
you.  Make  for  Rivendell.  There  I  hope  we  may  meet  again.  If  I 
do  not  come,  Elrond  will  advise  you. 

Yours  in  haste 
GANDALF.  F 

PS.  Do  NO  T  use  It  again,  not  for  any  reason  whatever!  Do 
not  travel  by  night!  F 

PPS.  Make  sure  that  it  is  the  real  Strider.  There  are  many 
strange  men  on  the  roads.  His  true  name  is  Aragorn.  F 

All  that  is  gold  does  not  glitter, 

Not  all  those  who  wander  are  lost; 

The  old  that  is  strong  does  not  wither, 

Deep  roots  are  not  reached  by  the  frost. 

From  the  ashes  afire  shall  be  woken, 

A  light  from  the  shadows  shall  spring; 

Renewed  shall  be  blade  that  was  broken, 

The  crownless  again  shall  be  king. 


PPPS.  I  hope  Butterbur  sends  this  promptly, 
man,  but  his  memory  is  like  a  lumber- 
room:  thing  wanted  always  buried. 

If  he  forgets,  I  shall  roast  him.  * 

Fare  Well! 


A  worthy 


STRIDER 


223 


Frodo  read  the  letter  to  himself,  and  then  passed  it  to 
Pippin  and  Sam.  ‘Really  old  Butterbur  has  made  a  mess  of 
things!’  he  said.  ‘He  deserves  roasting.  If  I  had  got  this  at 
once,  we  might  all  have  been  safe  in  Rivendell  by  now.  But 
what  can  have  happened  to  Gandalf  ?  He  writes  as  if  he  was 
going  into  great  danger.’ 

‘He  has  been  doing  that  for  many  years,’  said  Strider. 

Frodo  turned  and  looked  at  him  thoughtfully,  wondering 
about  Gandalf ’s  second  postscript.  ‘Why  didn’t  you  tell  me 
that  you  were  Gandalf ’s  friend  at  once?’  he  asked.  ‘It  would 
have  saved  time.’ 

‘Would  it?  Would  any  of  you  have  believed  me  till  now?’ 
said  Sttider.  ‘I  knew  nothing  of  this  letter.  For  all  I  knew  I 
had  to  persuade  you  to  trust  me  without  proofs,  if  I  was  to 
help  you.  In  any  case,  I  did  not  intend  to  tell  you  all  about 
myself  at  once.  I  had  to  study  you  first,  and  make  sure 
of  you.  The  Enemy  has  set  traps  for  me  before  now.  As 
soon  as  I  had  made  up  my  mind,  I  was  ready  to  tell  you 
whatever  you  asked.  But  I  must  admit,’  he  added  with  a 
queer  laugh,  ‘that  I  hoped  you  would  take  to  me  for  my 
own  sake.  A  hunted  man  sometimes  wearies  of  distrust  and 
longs  for  friendship.  But  there,  I  believe  my  looks  are  against 
me.’ 

‘They  are  -  at  first  sight  at  any  rate,’  laughed  Pippin  with 
sudden  relief  after  reading  Gandalf ’s  letter.  ‘But  handsome 
is  as  handsome  does,  as  we  say  in  the  Shire;  and  I  daresay 
we  shall  all  look  much  the  same  after  lying  for  days  in  hedges 
and  ditches.’ 

‘It  would  take  more  than  a  few  days,  or  weeks,  or  years,  of 
wandering  in  the  Wild  to  make  you  look  like  Strider,’  he 
answered.  ‘And  you  would  die  first,  unless  you  are  made  of 
sterner  stuff  than  you  look  to  be.’ 

Pippin  subsided;  but  Sam  was  not  daunted,  and  he  still 
eyed  Strider  dubiously.  ‘How  do  we  know  you  are  the  Strider 
that  Gandalf  speaks  about?’  he  demanded.  ‘You  never  men¬ 
tioned  Gandalf,  till  this  letter  came  out.  You  might  be  a 
play-acting  spy,  for  all  I  can  see,  trying  to  get  us  to  go  with 


224 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


you.  You  might  have  done  in  the  real  Strider  and  took  his 
clothes.  What  have  you  to  say  to  that?’ 

‘That  you  are  a  stout  fellow,’  answered  Strider;  ‘but  I  am 
afraid  my  only  answer  to  you,  Sam  Gamgee,  is  this.  If  I  had 
killed  the  real  Strider,  I  could  kill  you.  And  I  should  have 
killed  you  already  without  so  much  talk.  If  I  was  after  the 
Ring,  I  could  have  it  -  now!’ 

He  stood  up,  and  seemed  suddenly  to  grow  taller.  In  his 
eyes  gleamed  a  light,  keen  and  commanding.  Throwing  back 
his  cloak,  he  laid  his  hand  on  the  hilt  of  a  sword  that  had 
hung  concealed  by  his  side.  They  did  not  dare  to  move.  Sam 
sat  wide-mouthed  staring  at  him  dumbly. 

‘But  I  am  the  real  Strider,  fortunately,’  he  said,  looking 
down  at  them  with  his  face  softened  by  a  sudden  smile.  ‘I  am 
Aragorn  son  of  Arathorn;  and  if  by  life  or  death  I  can  save 
you,  I  will.’ 

There  was  a  long  silence.  At  last  Frodo  spoke  with  hesita¬ 
tion.  ‘I  believed  that  you  were  a  friend  before  the  letter  came,’ 
he  said,  ‘or  at  least  I  wished  to.  You  have  frightened  me 
several  times  tonight,  but  never  in  the  way  that  servants  of 
the  Enemy  would,  or  so  I  imagine.  I  think  one  of  his  spies 
would  -  well,  seem  fairer  and  feel  fouler,  if  you  understand.’ 

‘I  see,’  laughed  Strider.  ‘I  look  foul  and  feel  fair.  Is  that  it? 
All  that  is  gold  does  not  glitter,  not  all  those  who  wander  are  lost .’ 

‘Did  the  verses  apply  to  you  then?’  asked  Frodo.  ‘I  could 
not  make  out  what  they  were  about.  But  how  did  you  know 
that  they  were  in  Gandalf ’s  letter,  if  you  have  never  seen  it?’ 

‘I  did  not  know,’  he  answered.  ‘But  I  am  Aragorn,  and 
those  verses  go  with  that  name.’  He  drew  out  his  sword,  and 
they  saw  that  the  blade  was  indeed  broken  a  foot  below  the 
hilt.  ‘Not  much  use  is  it,  Sam?’  said  Strider.  ‘But  the  time  is 
near  when  it  shall  be  forged  anew.’ 

Sam  said  nothing. 

‘Well,’  said  Strider,  ‘with  Sam’s  permission  we  will  call  that 
settled.  Strider  shall  be  your  guide.  And  now  I  think  it  is  time 
you  went  to  bed  and  took  what  rest  you  can.  We  shall  have 


STRIDER 


225 


a  rough  road  tomorrow.  Even  if  we  are  allowed  to  leave  Bree 
unhindered,  we  can  hardly  hope  now  to  leave  it  unnoticed. 
But  I  shall  try  to  get  lost  as  soon  as  possible.  I  know  one  or 
two  ways  out  of  Bree-land  other  than  the  main  road.  If  once 
we  shake  off  the  pursuit,  I  shall  make  for  Weathertop.’ 

‘Weathertop?’  said  Sam.  ‘What’s  that?’ 

‘It  is  a  hill,  just  to  the  north  of  the  Road,  about  half  way 
from  here  to  Rivendell.  It  commands  a  wide  view  all  round; 
and  there  we  shall  have  a  chance  to  look  about  us.  Gandalf 
will  make  for  that  point,  if  he  follows  us.  After  Weathertop 
our  journey  will  become  more  difficult,  and  we  shall  have  to 
choose  between  various  dangers.’ 

‘When  did  you  last  see  Gandalf?’  asked  Frodo.  ‘Do  you 
know  where  he  is,  or  what  he  is  doing?’ 

Strider  looked  grave.  ‘I  do  not  know,’  he  said.  ‘I  came  west 
with  him  in  the  spring.  I  have  often  kept  watch  on  the  borders 
of  the  Shire  in  the  last  few  years,  when  he  was  busy  elsewhere. 
He  seldom  left  it  unguarded.  We  last  met  on  the  first  of  May: 
at  Sarn  Ford  down  the  Brandywine.  He  told  me  that  his 
business  with  you  had  gone  well,  and  that  you  would  be 
starting  for  Rivendell  in  the  last  week  of  September.  As  I 
knew  he  was  at  your  side,  I  went  away  on  a  journey  of  my 
own.  And  that  has  proved  ill;  for  plainly  some  news  reached 
him,  and  I  was  not  at  hand  to  help. 

‘I  am  troubled,  for  the  first  time  since  I  have  known  him. 
We  should  have  had  messages,  even  if  he  could  not  come 
himself.  When  I  returned,  many  days  ago,  I  heard  the  ill 
news.  The  tidings  had  gone  far  and  wide  that  Gandalf 
was  missing  and  the  horsemen  had  been  seen.  It  was  the 
El vcn -folk  of  Gildor  that  told  me  this;  and  later  they  told  me 
that  you  had  left  your  home;  but  there  was  no  news  of  your 
leaving  Buckland.  I  have  been  watching  the  East  Road 
anxiously.’ 

‘Do  you  think  the  Black  Riders  have  anything  to  do  with 
it  -  with  Gandalf ’s  absence,  I  mean?’  asked  Frodo. 

‘I  do  not  know  of  anything  else  that  could  have  hindered 
him,  except  the  Enemy  himself,’  said  Strider.  ‘But  do  not 


226 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


give  up  hope!  Gandalf  is  greater  than  you  Shire-folk  know  - 
as  a  rule  you  can  only  see  his  jokes  and  toys.  But  this  business 
of  ours  will  be  his  greatest  task.’ 

Pippin  yawned.  ‘I  am  sorry,’  he  said,  ‘but  I  am  dead  tired. 
In  spite  of  all  the  danger  and  worry  I  must  go  to  bed,  or 
sleep  where  I  sit.  Where  is  that  silly  fellow,  Merry?  It  would 
be  the  last  straw,  if  we  had  to  go  out  in  the  dark  to  look  for 
him.’ 

At  that  moment  they  heard  a  door  slam;  then  feet  came 
running  along  the  passage.  Merry  came  in  with  a  rush  fol¬ 
lowed  by  Nob.  He  shut  the  door  hastily,  and  leaned  against 
it.  He  was  out  of  breath.  They  stared  at  him  in  alarm  for  a 
moment  before  he  gasped:  ‘I  have  seen  them,  Frodo!  I  have 
seen  them!  Black  Riders!’ 

‘Black  Riders!’  cried  Frodo.  ‘Where?’ 

‘Here.  In  the  village.  I  stayed  indoors  for  an  hour.  Then  as 
you  did  not  come  back,  I  went  out  for  a  stroll.  I  had  come 
back  again  and  was  standing  just  outside  the  light  of  the 
lamp  looking  at  the  stars.  Suddenly  I  shivered  and  felt  that 
something  horrible  was  creeping  near:  there  was  a  sort  of 
deeper  shade  among  the  shadows  across  the  road,  just  beyond 
the  edge  of  the  lamplight.  It  slid  away  at  once  into  the  dark 
without  a  sound.  There  was  no  horse.’ 

Which  way  did  it  go?’  asked  Strider,  suddenly  and  sharply. 

Merry  started,  noticing  the  stranger  for  the  first  time.  ‘Go 
on!’  said  Frodo.  ‘This  is  a  friend  of  Gandalf ’s.  I  will  explain 
later.’ 

‘It  seemed  to  make  off  up  the  Road,  eastward,’  continued 
Merry.  ‘I  tried  to  follow.  Of  course,  it  vanished  almost  at 
once;  but  I  went  round  the  corner  and  on  as  far  as  the  last 
house  on  the  Road.’ 

Strider  looked  at  Merry  with  wonder.  ‘You  have  a  stout 
heart,’  he  said;  ‘but  it  was  foolish.’ 

‘I  don’t  know,’  said  Merry.  ‘Neither  brave  nor  silly,  I  think. 
I  could  hardly  help  myself.  I  seemed  to  be  drawn  somehow. 
Anyway,  I  went,  and  suddenly  I  heard  voices  by  the  hedge. 


STRIDER 


227 


One  was  muttering;  and  the  other  was  whispering,  or  hissing. 
I  couldn’t  hear  a  word  that  was  said.  I  did  not  creep  any 
closer,  because  I  began  to  tremble  all  over.  Then  I  felt  terri¬ 
fied,  and  I  turned  back,  and  was  just  going  to  bolt  home, 
when  something  came  behind  me  and  I  ...  I  fell  over.’ 

‘I  found  him,  sir,’  put  in  Nob.  ‘Mr.  Butterbur  sent  me  out 
with  a  lantern.  I  went  down  to  West-gate,  and  then  back  up 
towards  South-gate.  Just  nigh  Bill  Ferny’s  house  I  thought  I 
could  see  something  in  the  Road.  I  couldn’t  swear  to  it,  but 
it  looked  to  me  as  if  two  men  was  stooping  over  something, 
lifting  it.  I  gave  a  shout,  but  when  I  got  up  to  the  spot  there 
was  no  signs  of  them,  and  only  Mr.  Brandybuck  lying  by  the 
roadside.  He  seemed  to  be  asleep.  “I  thought  I  had  fallen  into 
deep  water,”  he  says  to  me,  when  I  shook  him.  Very  queer 
he  was,  and  as  soon  as  I  had  roused  him,  he  got  up  and  ran 
back  here  like  a  hare.’ 

‘I  am  afraid  that’s  true,’  said  Merry,  ‘though  I  don’t  know 
what  I  said.  I  had  an  ugly  dream,  which  I  can’t  remember. 
I  went  to  pieces.  I  don’t  know  what  came  over  me.’ 

‘I  do,’  said  Strider.  ‘The  Black  Breath.  The  Riders  must 
have  left  their  horses  outside,  and  passed  back  through  the 
South-gate  in  secret.  They  will  know  all  the  news  now,  for 
they  have  visited  Bill  Ferny;  and  probably  that  Southerner 
was  a  spy  as  well.  Something  may  happen  in  the  night,  before 
we  leave  Bree.’ 

‘What  will  happen?’  said  Merry.  ‘Will  they  attack  the  inn?’ 

‘No,  I  think  not,’  said  Strider.  ‘They  are  not  all  here  yet. 
And  in  any  case  that  is  not  their  way.  In  dark  and  loneliness 
they  are  strongest;  they  will  not  openly  attack  a  house  where 
there  are  lights  and  many  people  -  not  until  they  are  des¬ 
perate,  not  while  all  the  long  leagues  of  Eriador  still  lie  before 
us.  But  their  power  is  in  terror,  and  already  some  in  Bree  are 
in  their  clutch.  They  will  drive  these  wretches  to  some  evil 
work:  Ferny,  and  some  of  the  strangers,  and,  maybe,  the 
gatekeeper  too.  They  had  words  with  Harry  at  West-gate  on 
Monday.  I  was  watching  them.  He  was  white  and  shaking 
when  they  left  him.’ 


228 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘We  seem  to  have  enemies  all  round,’  said  Frodo.  What 
are  we  to  do?’ 

‘Stay  here,  and  do  not  go  to  your  rooms!  They  are  sure  to 
have  found  out  which  those  are.  The  hobbit-rooms  have 
windows  looking  north  and  close  to  the  ground.  We  will  all 
remain  together  and  bar  this  window  and  the  door.  But  first 
Nob  and  I  will  fetch  your  luggage.’ 

While  Strider  was  gone,  Frodo  gave  Merry  a  rapid  account 
of  all  that  had  happened  since  supper.  Merry  was  still  read¬ 
ing  and  pondering  Gandalf’s  letter  when  Strider  and  Nob 
returned. 

Well  Masters,’  said  Nob,  ‘I’ve  ruffled  up  the  clothes  and 
put  in  a  bolster  down  the  middle  of  each  bed.  And  I  made  a 
nice  imitation  of  your  head  with  a  brown  woollen  mat,  Mr. 
Bag  -  Underhill,  sir,’  he  added  with  a  grin. 

Pippin  laughed.  ‘Very  life-like!’  he  said.  ‘But  what  will 
happen  when  they  have  penetrated  the  disguise?’ 

‘We  shall  see,’  said  Strider.  ‘Let  us  hope  to  hold  the  fort 
till  morning.’ 

‘Good  night  to  you,’  said  Nob,  and  went  off  to  take  his 
part  in  the  watch  on  the  doors. 

Their  bags  and  gear  they  piled  on  the  parlour-floor.  They 
pushed  a  low  chair  against  the  door  and  shut  the  window. 
Peering  out,  Frodo  saw  that  the  night  was  still  clear.  The 
Sickle*  was  swinging  bright  above  the  shoulders  of  Bree-hill. 
He  then  closed  and  barred  the  heavy  inside  shutters  and  drew 
the  curtains  together.  Strider  built  up  the  fire  and  blew  out 
all  the  candles. 

The  hobbits  lay  down  on  their  blankets  with  their  feet 
towards  the  hearth;  but  Strider  settled  himself  in  the  chair 
against  the  door.  They  talked  for  a  little,  for  Merry  still  had 
several  questions  to  ask. 

‘Jumped  over  the  Moon!’  chuckled  Merry  as  he  rolled  him¬ 
self  in  his  blanket.  ‘Very  ridiculous  of  you,  Frodo!  But  I  wish 


*  The  Hobbits’  name  for  the  Plough  or  Great  Bear. 


STRIDER  229 

I  had  been  there  to  see.  The  worthies  of  Bree  will  be  dis¬ 
cussing  it  a  hundred  years  hence.’ 

‘I  hope  so,’  said  Strider.  Then  they  all  fell  silent,  and  one 
by  one  the  hobbits  dropped  off  to  sleep. 


Chapter  n 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


As  they  prepared  for  sleep  in  the  inn  at  Bree,  darkness  lay  on 
Buckland;  a  mist  strayed  in  the  dells  and  along  the  river-bank. 
The  house  at  Crickhollow  stood  silent.  Fatty  Bolger  opened 
the  door  cautiously  and  peered  out.  A  feeling  of  fear  had 
been  growing  on  him  all  day,  and  he  was  unable  to  rest  or  go 
to  bed:  there  was  a  brooding  threat  in  the  breathless  night-air. 
As  he  stared  out  into  the  gloom,  a  black  shadow  moved  under 
the  trees;  the  gate  seemed  to  open  of  its  own  accord  and  close 
again  without  a  sound.  Terror  seized  him.  He  shrank  back, 
and  for  a  moment  he  stood  trembling  in  the  hall.  Then  he 
shut  and  locked  the  door. 

The  night  deepened.  There  came  the  soft  sound  of  horses 
led  with  stealth  along  the  lane.  Outside  the  gate  they  stopped, 
and  three  black  figures  entered,  like  shades  of  night  creeping 
across  the  ground.  One  went  to  the  door,  one  to  the  corner 
of  the  house  on  either  side;  and  there  they  stood,  as  still  as 
the  shadows  of  stones,  while  night  went  slowly  on.  The  house 
and  the  quiet  trees  seemed  to  be  waiting  breathlessly. 

There  was  a  faint  stir  in  the  leaves,  and  a  cock  crowed  far 
away.  The  cold  hour  before  dawn  was  passing.  The  figure 
by  the  door  moved.  In  the  dark  without  moon  or  stars  a 
drawn  blade  gleamed,  as  if  a  chill  light  had  been  unsheathed. 
There  was  a  blow,  soft  but  heavy,  and  the  door  shuddered. 

‘Open,  in  the  name  of  Mordor!’  said  a  voice  thin  and 
menacing. 

At  a  second  blow  the  door  yielded  and  fell  back,  with 
timbers  burst  and  lock  broken.  The  black  figures  passed 
swiftly  in. 

At  that  moment,  among  the  trees  nearby,  a  horn  rang  out. 
It  rent  the  night  like  fire  on  a  hill-top. 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


231 


awaice!  fear!  fire!  foes!  awake! 

Fatty  Bolger  had  not  been  idle.  As  soon  as  he  saw  the  dark 
shapes  creep  from  the  garden,  he  knew  that  he  must  run  for 
it,  or  perish.  And  run  he  did,  out  of  the  back  door,  through 
the  garden,  and  over  the  fields.  When  he  reached  the  nearest 
house,  more  than  a  mile  away,  he  collapsed  on  the  doorstep. 
‘No,  no,  no!’  he  was  crying.  ‘No,  not  me!  I  haven’t  got  it!’  It 
was  some  time  before  anyone  could  make  out  what  he  was 
babbling  about.  At  last  they  got  the  idea  that  enemies  were 
in  Buckland,  some  strange  invasion  from  the  Old  Forest.  And 
then  they  lost  no  more  time. 

fear!  fire!  foes! 

The  Brandybucks  were  blowing  the  Horn-call  of  Buckland, 
that  had  not  been  sounded  for  a  hundred  years,  not  since  the 
white  wolves  came  in  the  Fell  Winter,  when  the  Brandywine 
was  frozen  over. 


awake!  awake! 

Far  away  answering  horns  were  heard.  The  alarm  was 
spreading. 

The  black  figures  fled  from  the  house.  One  of  them  let  fall 
a  hobbit-cloak  on  the  step,  as  he  ran.  In  the  lane  the  noise  of 
hoofs  broke  out,  and  gathering  to  a  gallop,  went  hammering 
away  into  the  darkness.  All  about  Crickhollow  there  was  the 
sound  of  horns  blowing,  and  voices  crying  and  feet  running. 
But  the  Black  Riders  rode  like  a  gale  to  the  North-gate.  Let 
the  little  people  blow!  Sauron  would  deal  with  them  later. 
Meanwhile  they  had  another  errand:  they  knew  now  that  the 
house  was  empty  and  the  Ring  had  gone.  They  rode  down 
the  guards  at  the  gate  and  vanished  from  the  Shire. 


232  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

In  the  early  night  Frodo  woke  from  deep  sleep,  suddenly, 
as  if  some  sound  or  presence  had  disturbed  him.  He  saw  that 
Strider  was  sitting  alert  in  his  chair:  his  eyes  gleamed  in  the 
light  of  the  fire,  which  had  been  tended  and  was  burning 
brightly;  but  he  made  no  sign  or  movement. 

Frodo  soon  went  to  sleep  again;  but  his  dreams  were  again 
troubled  with  the  noise  of  wind  and  of  galloping  hoofs.  The 
wind  seemed  to  be  curling  round  the  house  and  shaking  it; 
and  far  off  he  heard  a  horn  blowing  wildly.  He  opened  his 
eyes,  and  heard  a  cock  crowing  lustily  in  the  inn-yard.  Strider 
had  drawn  the  curtains  and  pushed  back  the  shutters  with  a 
clang.  The  first  grey  light  of  day  was  in  the  room,  and  a  cold 
air  was  coming  through  the  open  window. 

As  soon  as  Strider  had  roused  them  all,  he  led  the  way  to 
their  bedrooms.  When  they  saw  them  they  were  glad  that 
they  had  taken  his  advice:  the  windows  had  been  forced  open 
and  were  swinging,  and  the  curtains  were  flapping;  the  beds 
were  tossed  about,  and  the  bolsters  slashed  and  flung  upon 
the  floor;  the  brown  mat  was  torn  to  pieces. 

Strider  immediately  went  to  fetch  the  landlord.  Poor  Mr. 
Butterbur  looked  sleepy  and  frightened.  He  had  hardly  closed 
his  eyes  all  night  (so  he  said),  but  he  had  never  heard  a  sound. 

‘Never  has  such  a  thing  happened  in  my  time!’  he  cried, 
raising  his  hands  in  horror.  ‘Guests  unable  to  sleep  in  their 
beds,  and  good  bolsters  ruined  and  all!  What  are  we  coming 
to?’ 

‘Dark  times,’  said  Strider.  ‘But  for  the  present  you  may  be 
left  in  peace,  when  you  have  got  rid  of  us.  We  will  leave  at 
once.  Never  mind  about  breakfast:  a  drink  and  a  bite  standing 
will  have  to  do.  We  shall  be  packed  in  a  few  minutes.’ 

Mr.  Butterbur  hurried  off  to  see  that  their  ponies  were  got 
ready,  and  to  fetch  them  a  ‘bite’.  But  very  soon  he  came  back 
in  dismay.  The  ponies  had  vanished!  The  stable-doors  had 
all  been  opened  in  the  night,  and  they  were  gone:  not  only 
Merry’s  ponies,  but  every  other  horse  and  beast  in  the  place. 

Frodo  was  crushed  by  the  news.  How  could  they  hope  to 
reach  Rivendell  on  foot,  pursued  by  mounted  enemies?  They 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


233 


might  as  well  set  out  for  the  Moon.  Strider  sat  silent  for  a 
while,  looking  at  the  hobbits,  as  if  he  was  weighing  up  their 
strength  and  courage. 

‘Ponies  would  not  help  us  to  escape  horsemen,’  he  said  at 
last,  thoughtfully,  as  if  he  guessed  what  Frodo  had  in  mind. 
‘We  should  not  go  much  slower  on  foot,  not  on  the  roads 
that  I  mean  to  take.  I  was  going  to  walk  in  any  case.  It  is  the 
food  and  stores  that  trouble  me.  We  cannot  count  on  getting 
anything  to  eat  between  here  and  Rivendell,  except  what  we 
take  with  us;  and  we  ought  to  take  plenty  to  spare;  for  we 
may  be  delayed,  or  forced  to  go  round-about,  far  out  of  the 
direct  way.  How  much  are  you  prepared  to  carry  on  your 
backs?’ 

‘As  much  as  we  must,’  said  Pippin  with  a  sinking  heart, 
but  trying  to  show  that  he  was  tougher  than  he  looked  (or 
felt). 

‘I  can  carry  enough  for  two,’  said  Sam  defiantly. 

‘Can’t  anything  be  done,  Mr.  Butterbur?’  asked  Frodo. 
‘Can’t  we  get  a  couple  of  ponies  in  the  village,  or  even  one 
just  for  the  baggage?  I  don’t  suppose  we  could  hire  them, 
but  we  might  be  able  to  buy  them,’  he  added,  doubtfully, 
wondering  if  he  could  afford  it. 

‘I  doubt  it,’  said  the  landlord  unhappily.  ‘The  two  or  three 
riding-ponies  that  there  were  in  Bree  were  stabled  in  my  yard, 
and  they’re  gone.  As  for  other  animals,  horses  or  ponies  for 
draught  or  what  not,  there  are  very  few  of  them  in  Bree,  and 
they  won’t  be  for  sale.  But  I’ll  do  what  I  can.  I’ll  rout  out  Bob 
and  send  him  round  as  soon  as  may  be.’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Strider  reluctantly,  ‘you  had  better  do  that.  I  am 
afraid  we  shall  have  to  try  to  get  one  pony  at  least.  But  so 
ends  all  hope  of  starting  early,  and  slipping  away  quietly!  We 
might  as  well  have  blown  a  horn  to  announce  our  departure. 
That  was  part  of  their  plan,  no  doubt.’ 

‘There  is  one  crumb  of  comfort,’  said  Merry,  ‘and  more 
than  a  crumb,  I  hope:  we  can  have  breakfast  while  we  wait  - 
and  sit  down  to  it.  Let’s  get  hold  of  Nob!’ 


234 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


In  the  end  there  was  more  than  three  hours’  delay.  Bob 
came  back  with  the  report  that  no  horse  or  pony  was  to  be 
got  for  love  or  money  in  the  neighbourhood  -  except  one: 
Bill  Ferny  had  one  that  he  might  possibly  sell.  ‘A  poor  old 
half-starved  creature  it  is,’  said  Bob;  ‘but  he  won’t  part  with 
it  for  less  than  thrice  its  worth,  seeing  how  you’re  placed,  not 
if  I  knows  Bill  Ferny.’ 

‘Bill  Ferny?’  said  Frodo.  ‘Isn’t  there  some  trick?  Wouldn’t 
the  beast  bolt  back  to  him  with  all  our  stuff,  or  help  in  tracking 
us,  or  something?’ 

‘I  wonder,’  said  Strider.  ‘But  I  cannot  imagine  any  animal 
running  home  to  him,  once  it  got  away.  I  fancy  this  is  only 
an  afterthought  of  kind  Master  Ferny’s:  just  a  way  of  increas¬ 
ing  his  profits  from  the  affair.  The  chief  danger  is  that  the 
poor  beast  is  probably  at  death’s  door.  But  there  does  not 
seem  any  choice.  What  does  he  want  for  it?’ 

Bill  Ferny’s  price  was  twelve  silver  pennies;  and  that  was 
indeed  at  least  three  times  the  pony’s  value  in  those  parts.  It 
proved  to  be  a  bony,  underfed,  and  dispirited  animal;  but 
it  did  not  look  like  dying  just  yet.  Mr.  Butterbur  paid  for  it 
himself,  and  offered  Merry  another  eighteen  pence  as  some 
compensation  for  the  lost  animals.  He  was  an  honest  man, 
and  well-off  as  things  were  reckoned  in  Bree;  but  thirty  silver 
pennies  was  a  sore  blow  to  him,  and  being  cheated  by  Bill 
Ferny  made  it  harder  to  bear. 

As  a  matter  of  fact  he  came  out  on  the  right  side  in  the 
end.  It  turned  out  later  that  only  one  horse  had  been  actually 
stolen.  The  others  had  been  driven  off,  or  had  bolted  in 
terror,  and  were  found  wandering  in  different  corners  of 
the  Bree-land.  Merry’s  ponies  had  escaped  altogether,  and 
eventually  (having  a  good  deal  of  sense)  they  made  their  way 
to  the  Downs  in  search  of  Fatty  Lumpkin.  So  they  came 
under  the  care  of  Tom  Bombadil  for  a  while,  and  were  well- 
off.  But  when  news  of  the  events  at  Bree  came  to  Tom’s  ears, 
he  sent  them  to  Mr.  Butterbur,  who  thus  got  five  good  beasts 
at  a  very  fair  price.  They  had  to  work  harder  in  Bree,  but 
Bob  treated  them  well;  so  on  the  whole  they  were  lucky:  they 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK  235 

missed  a  dark  and  dangerous  journey.  But  they  never  came 
to  Rivendell. 

However,  in  the  meanwhile  for  all  Mr.  Butterbur  knew  his 
money  was  gone  for  good,  or  for  bad.  And  he  had  other 
troubles.  For  there  was  a  great  commotion  as  soon  as  the 
remaining  guests  were  astir  and  heard  news  of  the  raid  on 
the  inn.  The  southern  travellers  had  lost  several  horses  and 
blamed  the  innkeeper  loudly,  until  it  became  known  that  one 
of  their  own  number  had  also  disappeared  in  the  night,  none 
other  than  Bill  Ferny’s  squint-eyed  companion.  Suspicion  fell 
on  him  at  once. 

‘If  you  pick  up  with  a  horse-thief,  and  bring  him  to  my 
house,’  said  Butterbur  angrily,  ‘you  ought  to  pay  for  all  the 
damage  yourselves  and  not  come  shouting  at  me.  Go  and  ask 
Ferny  where  your  handsome  friend  is!’  But  it  appeared  that 
he  was  nobody’s  friend,  and  nobody  could  recollect  when  he 
had  joined  their  party. 

After  their  breakfast  the  hobbits  had  to  re -pack,  and  get 
together  further  supplies  for  the  longer  journey  they  were 
now  expecting.  It  was  close  on  ten  o’clock  before  they  at  last 
got  off.  By  that  time  the  whole  of  Bree  was  buzzing  with 
excitement.  Frodo’s  vanishing  trick;  the  appearance  of  the 
black  horsemen;  the  robbing  of  the  stables;  and  not  least 
the  news  that  Strider  the  Ranger  had  joined  the  mysterious 
hobbits,  made  such  a  tale  as  would  last  for  many  uneventful 
years.  Most  of  the  inhabitants  of  Bree  and  Staddle,  and  many 
even  from  Combe  and  Archet,  were  crowded  in  the  road  to 
see  the  travellers  start.  The  other  guests  in  the  inn  were  at 
the  doors  or  hanging  out  of  the  windows. 

Strider  had  changed  his  mind,  and  had  decided  to  leave 
Bree  by  the  main  road.  Any  attempt  to  set  off  across  country 
at  once  would  only  make  matters  worse:  half  the  inhabitants 
would  follow  them,  to  see  what  they  were  up  to,  and  to 
prevent  them  from  trespassing. 

They  said  farewell  to  Nob  and  Bob,  and  took  leave  of  Mr. 
Butterbur  with  many  thanks.  ‘I  hope  we  shall  meet  again 


236 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


some  day,  when  things  are  merry  once  more,’  said  Frodo.  ‘I 
should  like  nothing  better  than  to  stay  in  your  house  in  peace 
for  a  while.’ 

They  tramped  off,  anxious  and  downhearted,  under  the 
eyes  of  the  crowd.  Not  all  the  faces  were  friendly,  nor  all  the 
words  that  were  shouted.  But  Strider  seemed  to  be  held  in 
awe  by  most  of  the  Bree-landers,  and  those  that  he  stared  at 
shut  their  mouths  and  drew  away.  He  walked  in  front  with 
Frodo;  next  came  Merry  and  Pippin;  and  last  came  Sam 
leading  the  pony,  which  was  laden  with  as  much  of  their 
baggage  as  they  had  the  heart  to  give  it;  but  already  it  looked 
less  dejected,  as  if  it  approved  of  the  change  in  its  fortunes. 
Sam  was  chewing  an  apple  thoughtfully.  He  had  a  pocket  full 
of  them:  a  parting  present  from  Nob  and  Bob.  ‘Apples  for 
walking,  and  a  pipe  for  sitting,’  he  said.  ‘But  I  reckon  I’ll  miss 
them  both  before  long.’ 

The  hobbits  took  no  notice  of  the  inquisitive  heads  that 
peeped  out  of  doors,  or  popped  over  walls  and  fences,  as 
they  passed.  But  as  they  drew  near  to  the  further  gate,  Frodo 
saw  a  dark  ill-kept  house  behind  a  thick  hedge:  the  last  house 
in  the  village.  In  one  of  the  windows  he  caught  a  glimpse  of 
a  sallow  face  with  sly,  slanting  eyes;  but  it  vanished  at  once. 

‘So  that’s  where  that  southerner  is  hiding!’  he  thought.  ‘He 
looks  more  than  half  like  a  goblin.’ 

Over  the  hedge  another  man  was  staring  boldly.  He  had 
heavy  black  brows,  and  dark  scornful  eyes;  his  large  mouth 
curled  in  a  sneer.  He  was  smoking  a  short  black  pipe.  As  they 
approached  he  took  it  out  of  his  mouth  and  spat. 

‘Morning,  Longshanks!’  he  said.  ‘Off  early?  Found  some 
friends  at  last?’  Strider  nodded,  but  did  not  answer. 

‘Morning,  my  little  friends!’  he  said  to  the  others.  ‘I  sup¬ 
pose  you  know  who  you’ve  taken  up  with?  That’s  Stick-at- 
naught  Strider,  that  is!  Though  I’ve  heard  other  names  not 
so  pretty.  Watch  out  tonight!  And  you,  Sammie,  don’t  go 
ill-treating  my  poor  old  pony!  Pah!’  He  spat  again. 

Sam  turned  quickly.  ‘And  you,  Ferny,’  he  said,  ‘put  your 
ugly  face  out  of  sight,  or  it  will  get  hurt.’  With  a  sudden  flick, 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


237 


quick  as  lightning,  an  apple  left  his  hand  and  hit  Bill  square 
on  the  nose.  He  ducked  too  late,  and  curses  came  from 
behind  the  hedge.  ‘Waste  of  a  good  apple,’  said  Sam  regret¬ 
fully,  and  strode  on. 

At  last  they  left  the  village  behind.  The  escort  of  children 
and  stragglers  that  had  followed  them  got  tired  and  turned 
back  at  the  South-gate.  Passing  through,  they  kept  on  along 
the  Road  for  some  miles.  It  bent  to  the  left,  curving  back  into 
its  eastward  line  as  it  rounded  the  feet  of  Bree-hill,  and  then 
it  began  to  run  swiftly  downwards  into  wooded  country.  To 
their  left  they  could  see  some  of  the  houses  and  hobbit-holes 
of  Staddle  on  the  gentler  south-eastern  slopes  of  the  hill; 
down  in  a  deep  hollow  away  north  of  the  Road  there  were 
wisps  of  rising  smoke  that  showed  where  Combe  lay;  Archet 
was  hidden  in  the  trees  beyond. 

After  the  Road  had  run  down  some  way,  and  had  left 
Bree-hill  standing  tall  and  brown  behind,  they  came  on  a 
narrow  track  that  led  off  towards  the  North.  ‘This  is  where 
we  leave  the  open  and  take  to  cover,’  said  Strider. 

‘Not  a  “short  cut”,  I  hope,’  said  Pippin.  ‘Our  last  short  cut 
through  woods  nearly  ended  in  disaster.’ 

‘Ah,  but  you  had  not  got  me  with  you  then,’  laughed 
Strider.  ‘My  cuts,  short  or  long,  don’t  go  wrong.’  He  took  a 
look  up  and  down  the  Road.  No  one  was  in  sight;  and  he  led 
the  way  quickly  down  towards  the  wooded  valley. 

His  plan,  as  far  as  they  could  understand  it  without  know¬ 
ing  the  country,  was  to  go  towards  Archet  at  first,  but  to  bear 
right  and  pass  it  on  the  east,  and  then  to  steer  as  straight  as 
he  could  over  the  wild  lands  to  Weathertop  Hill.  In  that  way 
they  would,  if  all  went  well,  cut  off  a  great  loop  of  the  Road, 
which  further  on  bent  southwards  to  avoid  the  Midgewater 
Marshes.  But,  of  course,  they  would  have  to  pass  through 
the  marshes  themselves,  and  Strider’s  description  of  them 
was  not  encouraging. 

However,  in  the  meanwhile,  walking  was  not  unpleasant. 
Indeed,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  disturbing  events  of  the 


238 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


night  before,  they  would  have  enjoyed  this  part  of  the  journey 
better  than  any  up  to  that  time.  The  sun  was  shining,  clear 
but  not  too  hot.  The  woods  in  the  valley  were  still  leafy  and 
full  of  colour,  and  seemed  peaceful  and  wholesome.  Strider 
guided  them  confidently  among  the  many  crossing  paths, 
although  left  to  themselves  they  would  soon  have  been  at  a 
loss.  He  was  taking  a  wandering  course  with  many  turns  and 
doublings,  to  put  off  any  pursuit. 

‘Bill  Ferny  will  have  watched  where  we  left  the  Road,  for 
certain,’  he  said;  ‘though  I  don’t  think  he  will  follow  us  him¬ 
self.  He  knows  the  land  round  here  well  enough,  but  he  knows 
he  is  not  a  match  for  me  in  a  wood.  It  is  what  he  may  tell 
others  that  I  am  afraid  of.  I  don’t  suppose  they  are  far  away. 
If  they  think  we  have  made  for  Archet,  so  much  the  better.’ 

Whether  because  of  Strider’s  skill  or  for  some  other  reason, 
they  saw  no  sign  and  heard  no  sound  of  any  other  living  thing 
all  that  day:  neither  two-footed,  except  birds;  nor  four-footed, 
except  one  fox  and  a  few  squirrels.  The  next  day  they  began 
to  steer  a  steady  course  eastwards;  and  still  all  was  quiet  and 
peaceful.  On  the  third  day  out  from  Bree  they  came  out  of  the 
Chetwood.  The  land  had  been  falling  steadily,  ever  since  they 
turned  aside  from  the  Road,  and  they  now  entered  a  wide  flat 
expanse  of  country,  much  more  difficult  to  manage .  They  were 
far  beyond  the  borders  of  the  Bree-land,  out  in  the  pathless 
wilderness,  and  drawing  near  to  the  Midgewater  Marshes. 

The  ground  now  became  damp,  and  in  places  boggy  and 
here  and  there  they  came  upon  pools,  and  wide  stretches  of 
reeds  and  rushes  filled  with  the  warbling  of  little  hidden  birds. 
They  had  to  pick  their  way  carefully  to  keep  both  dry-footed 
and  on  their  proper  course.  At  first  they  made  fair  progress, 
but  as  they  went  on,  their  passage  became  slower  and  more 
dangerous.  The  marshes  were  bewildering  and  treacherous, 
and  there  was  no  permanent  trail  even  for  Rangers  to  find 
through  their  shifting  quagmires.  The  flies  began  to  torment 
them,  and  the  air  was  full  of  clouds  of  tiny  midges  that  crept 
up  their  sleeves  and  breeches  and  into  their  hair. 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK  239 

‘I  am  being  eaten  alive!’  cried  Pippin.  ‘Midgewater!  There 
are  more  midges  than  water!’ 

‘What  do  they  live  on  when  they  can’t  get  hobbit?’  asked 
Sam,  scratching  his  neck. 

They  spent  a  miserable  day  in  this  lonely  and  unpleasant 
country.  Their  camping-place  was  damp,  cold,  and  uncom¬ 
fortable;  and  the  biting  insects  would  not  let  them  sleep. 
There  were  also  abominable  creatures  haunting  the  reeds  and 
tussocks  that  from  the  sound  of  them  were  evil  relatives  of  the 
cricket.  There  were  thousands  of  them,  and  they  squeaked  all 
round,  neek-breek ,  breek-neek,  unceasingly  all  the  night,  until 
the  hobbits  were  nearly  frantic. 

The  next  day,  the  fourth,  was  little  better,  and  the  night 
almost  as  comfortless.  Though  the  Neekerbreekers  (as  Sam 
called  them)  had  been  left  behind,  the  midges  still  pursued 
them. 

As  Frodo  lay,  tired  but  unable  to  close  his  eyes,  it  seemed 
to  him  that  far  away  there  came  a  light  in  the  eastern  sky:  it 
flashed  and  faded  many  times.  It  was  not  the  dawn,  for  that 
was  still  some  hours  off. 

What  is  the  light?’  he  said  to  Strider,  who  had  risen,  and 
was  standing,  gazing  ahead  into  the  night. 

‘I  do  not  know,’  Strider  answered.  ‘It  is  too  distant  to  make 
out.  It  is  like  lightning  that  leaps  up  from  the  hill-tops.’ 

Frodo  lay  down  again,  but  for  a  long  while  he  could  still 
see  the  white  flashes,  and  against  them  the  tall  dark  figure  of 
Strider,  standing  silent  and  watchful.  At  last  he  passed  into 
uneasy  sleep. 

They  had  not  gone  far  on  the  fifth  day  when  they  left  the 
last  straggling  pools  and  reed-beds  of  the  marshes  behind 
them.  The  land  before  them  began  steadily  to  rise  again. 
Away  in  the  distance  eastward  they  could  now  see  a  line  of 
hills.  The  highest  of  them  was  at  the  right  of  the  line  and  a 
little  separated  from  the  others.  It  had  a  conical  top,  slightly 
flattened  at  the  summit. 

‘That  is  Weathertop,’  said  Strider.  ‘The  Old  Road,  which 


240  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

we  have  left  far  away  on  our  right,  runs  to  the  south  of  it  and 
passes  not  far  from  its  foot.  We  might  reach  it  by  noon 
tomorrow,  if  we  go  straight  towards  it.  I  suppose  we  had 
better  do  so.’ 

What  do  you  mean?’  asked  Frodo. 

‘I  mean:  when  we  do  get  there,  it  is  not  certain  what  we 
shall  find.  It  is  close  to  the  Road.’ 

‘But  surely  we  were  hoping  to  find  Gandalf  there?’ 

‘Yes;  but  the  hope  is  faint.  If  he  comes  this  way  at  all,  he 
may  not  pass  through  Bree,  and  so  he  may  not  know  what 
we  are  doing.  And  anyway,  unless  by  luck  we  arrive  almost 
together,  we  shall  miss  one  another;  it  will  not  be  safe  for  him 
or  for  us  to  wait  there  long.  If  the  Riders  fail  to  find  us  in 
the  wilderness,  they  are  likely  to  make  for  Weathertop  them¬ 
selves.  It  commands  a  wide  view  all  round.  Indeed,  there  are 
many  birds  and  beasts  in  this  country  that  could  see  us,  as 
we  stand  here,  from  that  hill-top.  Not  all  the  birds  are  to  be 
trusted,  and  there  are  other  spies  more  evil  than  they  are.’ 

The  hobbits  looked  anxiously  at  the  distant  hills.  Sam 
looked  up  into  the  pale  sky,  fearing  to  see  hawks  or  eagles 
hovering  over  them  with  bright  unfriendly  eyes.  ‘You  do 
make  me  feel  uncomfortable  and  lonesome,  Strider!’  he  said. 

‘What  do  you  advise  us  to  do?’  asked  Frodo. 

‘I  think,’  answered  Strider  slowly,  as  if  he  was  not  quite 
sure,  ‘I  think  the  best  thing  is  to  go  as  straight  eastward  from 
here  as  we  can,  to  make  for  the  line  of  hills,  not  for 
Weathertop.  There  we  can  strike  a  path  I  know  that  runs  at 
their  feet;  it  will  bring  us  to  Weathertop  from  the  north  and 
less  openly.  Then  we  shall  see  what  we  shall  see.’ 

All  that  day  they  plodded  along,  until  the  cold  and  early 
evening  came  down.  The  land  became  drier  and  more  barren; 
but  mists  and  vapours  lay  behind  them  on  the  marshes.  A 
few  melancholy  birds  were  piping  and  wailing,  until  the  round 
red  sun  sank  slowly  into  the  western  shadows;  then  an  empty 
silence  fell.  The  hobbits  thought  of  the  soft  light  of  sunset 
glancing  through  the  cheerful  windows  of  Bag  End  far  away. 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


241 


At  the  day’s  end  they  came  to  a  stream  that  wandered 
down  from  the  hills  to  lose  itself  in  the  stagnant  marshland, 
and  they  went  up  along  its  hanks  while  the  light  lasted.  It  was 
already  night  when  at  last  they  halted  and  made  their  camp 
under  some  stunted  alder-trees  by  the  shores  of  the  stream. 
Ahead  there  loomed  now  against  the  dusky  sky  the  bleak  and 
treeless  backs  of  the  hills.  That  night  they  set  a  watch,  and 
Strider,  it  seemed,  did  not  sleep  at  all.  The  moon  was  waxing, 
and  in  the  early  night-hours  a  cold  grey  light  lay  on  the  land. 

Next  morning  they  set  out  again  soon  after  sunrise.  There 
was  a  frost  in  the  air,  and  the  sky  was  a  pale  clear  blue.  The 
hobbits  felt  refreshed,  as  if  they  had  had  a  night  of  unbroken 
sleep.  Already  they  were  getting  used  to  much  walking  on 
short  commons  -  shorter  at  any  rate  than  what  in  the  Shire 
they  would  have  thought  barely  enough  to  keep  them  on  their 
legs.  Pippin  declared  that  Frodo  was  looking  twice  the  hobbit 
that  he  had  been. 

‘Very  odd,’  said  Frodo,  tightening  his  belt,  ‘considering 
that  there  is  actually  a  good  deal  less  of  me.  I  hope  the 
thinning  process  will  not  go  on  indefinitely,  or  I  shall  become 
a  wraith.’ 

‘Do  not  speak  of  such  things!’  said  Strider  quickly,  and 
with  surprising  earnestness. 

The  hills  drew  nearer.  They  made  an  undulating  ridge, 
often  rising  almost  to  a  thousand  feet,  and  here  and  there 
falling  again  to  low  clefts  or  passes  leading  into  the  eastern 
land  beyond.  Along  the  crest  of  the  ridge  the  hobbits  could 
see  what  looked  to  be  the  remains  of  green-grown  walls  and 
dikes,  and  in  the  clefts  there  still  stood  the  ruins  of  old  works 
of  stone.  By  night  they  had  reached  the  feet  of  the  westward 
slopes,  and  there  they  camped.  It  was  the  night  of  the  fifth 
of  October,  and  they  were  six  days  out  from  Bree. 

In  the  morning  they  found,  for  the  first  time  since  they  had 
left  the  Chetwood,  a  track  plain  to  see.  They  turned  right 
and  followed  it  southwards.  It  ran  cunningly,  taking  a  line 
that  seemed  chosen  so  as  to  keep  as  much  hidden  as  possible 


242  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

from  the  view,  both  of  the  hill-tops  above  and  of  the  flats  to 
the  west.  It  dived  into  dells,  and  hugged  steep  banks;  and 
where  it  passed  over  flatter  and  more  open  ground  on  either 
side  of  it  there  were  lines  of  large  boulders  and  hewn  stones 
that  screened  the  travellers  almost  like  a  hedge. 

‘I  wonder  who  made  this  path,  and  what  for,’  said  Merry, 
as  they  walked  along  one  of  these  avenues,  where  the  stones 
were  unusually  large  and  closely  set.  ‘I  am  not  sure  that  I  like 
it:  it  has  a  -  well,  rather  a  barrow-wightish  look.  Is  there  any 
barrow  on  Weathertop?’ 

‘No.  There  is  no  barrow  on  Weathertop,  nor  on  any  of 
these  hills,’  answered  Strider.  ‘The  Men  of  the  West  did  not 
live  here;  though  in  their  latter  days  they  defended  the  hills 
for  a  while  against  the  evil  that  came  out  of  Angmar.  This 
path  was  made  to  serve  the  forts  along  the  walls.  But  long 
before,  in  the  first  days  of  the  North  Kingdom,  they  built  a 
great  watch-tower  on  Weathertop,  Amon  Sul  they  called  it. 
It  was  burned  and  broken,  and  nothing  remains  of  it  now  but 
a  tumbled  ring,  like  a  rough  crown  on  the  old  hill’s  head.  Yet 
once  it  was  tall  and  fair.  It  is  told  that  Elendil  stood  there 
watching  for  the  coming  of  Gil-galad  out  of  the  West,  in  the 
days  of  the  Last  Alliance.’ 

The  hobbits  gazed  at  Strider.  It  seemed  that  he  was  learned 
in  old  lore,  as  well  as  in  the  ways  of  the  wild.  ‘Who  was 
Gil-galad?’  asked  Merry;  but  Strider  did  not  answer,  and 
seemed  to  be  lost  in  thought.  Suddenly  a  low  voice 
murmured: 


Gil-galad  was  an  Elven-king. 

Of  him  the  harpers  sadly  sing: 
the  last  whose  realm  was  fair  and  free 
between  the  Mountains  and  the  Sea. 

His  sword  was  long,  his  lance  was  keen, 
his  shining  helm  afar  was  seen; 
the  countless  stars  of  heaven’s  field 
were  mirrored  in  his  silver  shield. 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


243 


But  long  ago  he  rode  away, 
and  where  he  dwelleth  none  can  say; 
for  into  darkness  fell  his  star 
in  Mordor  where  the  shadows  are. 

The  others  turned  in  amazement,  for  the  voice  was  Sam’s. 

‘Don’t  stop!’  said  Merry. 

‘That’s  all  I  know,’  stammered  Sam,  blushing.  ‘I  learned  it 
from  Mr.  Bilbo  when  I  was  a  lad.  He  used  to  tell  me  tales 
like  that,  knowing  how  I  was  always  one  for  hearing  about 
Elves.  It  was  Mr.  Bilbo  as  taught  me  my  letters.  He  was 
mighty  book-learned  was  dear  old  Mr.  Bilbo.  And  he  wrote 
poetry.  He  wrote  what  I  have  just  said.’ 

‘He  did  not  make  it  up,’  said  Strider.  ‘It  is  part  of  the  lay 
that  is  called  The  Fall  of  Gil-galad,  which  is  in  an  ancient 
tongue.  Bilbo  must  have  translated  it.  I  never  knew  that.’ 

‘There  was  a  lot  more,’  said  Sam,  ‘all  about  Mordor.  I 
didn’t  learn  that  part,  it  gave  me  the  shivers.  I  never  thought 
I  should  be  going  that  way  myself!’ 

‘Going  to  Mordor!’  cried  Pippin.  ‘I  hope  it  won’t  come  to 
that!’ 

‘Do  not  speak  that  name  so  loudly!’  said  Strider. 

It  was  already  mid-day  when  they  drew  near  the  southern 
end  of  the  path,  and  saw  before  them,  in  the  pale  clear  light 
of  the  October  sun,  a  grey-green  bank,  leading  up  like  a 
bridge  on  to  the  northward  slope  of  the  hill.  They  decided 
to  make  for  the  top  at  once,  while  the  daylight  was  broad. 
Concealment  was  no  longer  possible,  and  they  could  only 
hope  that  no  enemy  or  spy  was  observing  them.  Nothing  was 
to  be  seen  moving  on  the  hill.  If  Gandalf  was  anywhere  about, 
there  was  no  sign  of  him. 

On  the  western  flank  of  Weathertop  they  found  a  sheltered 
hollow,  at  the  bottom  of  which  there  was  a  bowl-shaped  dell 
with  grassy  sides.  There  they  left  Sam  and  Pippin  with  the 
pony  and  their  packs  and  luggage.  The  other  three  went  on. 
After  half  an  hour’s  plodding  climb  Strider  reached  the  crown 


244 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


of  the  hill;  Frodo  and  Merry  followed,  tired  and  breathless. 
The  last  slope  had  been  steep  and  rocky. 

On  the  top  they  found,  as  Strider  had  said,  a  wide  ring  of 
ancient  stone -work,  now  crumbling  or  covered  with  age-long 
grass.  But  in  the  centre  a  cairn  of  broken  stones  had  been 
piled.  They  were  blackened  as  if  with  fire.  About  them  the 
turf  was  burned  to  the  roots  and  all  within  the  ring  the  grass 
was  scorched  and  shrivelled,  as  if  flames  had  swept  the  hill¬ 
top;  but  there  was  no  sign  of  any  living  thing. 

Standing  upon  the  rim  of  the  ruined  circle,  they  saw  all 
round  below  them  a  wide  prospect,  for  the  most  part  of  lands 
empty  and  featureless,  except  for  patches  of  woodland  away 
to  the  south,  beyond  which  they  caught  here  and  there  the 
glint  of  distant  water.  Beneath  them  on  this  southern  side 
there  ran  like  a  ribbon  the  Old  Road,  coming  out  of  the  West 
and  winding  up  and  down,  until  it  faded  behind  a  ridge  of 
dark  land  to  the  east.  Nothing  was  moving  on  it.  Following 
its  line  eastward  with  their  eyes  they  saw  the  Mountains:  the 
nearer  foothills  were  brown  and  sombre;  behind  them  stood 
taller  shapes  of  grey,  and  behind  those  again  were  high  white 
peaks  glimmering  among  the  clouds. 

Well,  here  we  are!’  said  Merry.  ‘And  very  cheerless  and 
uninviting  it  looks!  There  is  no  water  and  no  shelter.  And  no 
sign  of  Gandalf.  But  I  don’t  blame  him  for  not  waiting  -  if 
he  ever  came  here.’ 

‘I  wonder,’  said  Strider,  looking  round  thoughtfully.  ‘Even 
if  he  was  a  day  or  two  behind  us  at  Bree,  he  could  have 
arrived  here  first.  He  can  ride  very  swiftly  when  need  presses.’ 
Suddenly  he  stooped  and  looked  at  the  stone  on  the  top  of 
the  cairn;  it  was  flatter  than  the  others,  and  whiter,  as  if  it 
had  escaped  the  fire.  He  picked  it  up  and  examined  it,  turning 
it  in  his  fingers.  ‘This  has  been  handled  recently,’  he  said. 
‘What  do  you  think  of  these  marks?’ 

On  the  flat  under-side  Frodo  saw  some  scratches:  I*- III 
‘There  seems  to  be  a  stroke,  a  dot,  and  three  more  strokes,’ 
he  said. 

‘The  stroke  on  the  left  might  be  a  G-rune  with  thin 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


245 


branches,’  said  Strider.  ‘It  might  be  a  sign  left  by  Gandalf, 
though  one  cannot  be  sure.  The  scratches  are  fine,  and  they 
certainly  look  fresh.  But  the  marks  might  mean  something 
quite  different,  and  have  nothing  to  do  with  us.  Rangers  use 
runes,  and  they  come  here  sometimes.’ 

‘What  could  they  mean,  even  if  Gandalf  made  them?’ 
asked  Merry. 

‘I  should  say,’  answered  Strider,  ‘that  they  stood  for  G3, 
and  were  a  sign  that  Gandalf  was  here  on  October  the  third: 
that  is  three  days  ago  now.  It  would  also  show  that  he  was  in 
a  hurry  and  danger  was  at  hand,  so  that  he  had  no  time  or 
did  not  dare  to  write  anything  longer  or  plainer.  If  that  is  so, 
we  must  be  wary.’ 

‘I  wish  we  could  feel  sure  that  he  made  the  marks,  whatever 
they  may  mean,’  said  Frodo.  ‘It  would  be  a  great  comfort  to 
know  that  he  was  on  the  way,  in  front  of  us  or  behind  us.’ 

‘Perhaps,’  said  Strider.  ‘For  myself,  I  believe  that  he  was 
here,  and  was  in  danger.  There  have  been  scorching  flames 
here;  and  now  the  light  that  we  saw  three  nights  ago  in  the 
eastern  sky  comes  back  to  my  mind.  I  guess  that  he  was 
attacked  on  this  hill-top,  but  with  what  result  I  cannot  tell. 
He  is  here  no  longer,  and  we  must  now  look  after  ourselves 
and  make  our  own  way  to  Rivendell,  as  best  we  can.’ 

‘How  far  is  Rivendell?’  asked  Merry,  gazing  round  wearily. 
The  world  looked  wild  and  wide  from  Weathertop. 

‘I  don’t  know  if  the  Road  has  ever  been  measured  in  miles 
beyond  the  Forsaken  Inn ,  a  day’s  journey  east  of  Bree,’ 
answered  Strider.  ‘Some  say  it  is  so  far,  and  some  say  other¬ 
wise.  It  is  a  strange  road,  and  folk  are  glad  to  reach  their 
journey’s  end,  whether  the  time  is  long  or  short.  But  I  know 
how  long  it  would  take  me  on  my  own  feet,  with  fair  weather 
and  no  ill  fortune:  twelve  days  from  here  to  the  Ford  of 
Bruinen,  where  the  Road  crosses  the  Loudwater  that  runs 
out  of  Rivendell.  We  have  at  least  a  fortnight’s  journey  before 
us,  for  I  do  not  think  we  shall  be  able  to  use  the  Road.’ 

‘A  fortnight!’  said  Frodo.  ‘A  lot  may  happen  in  that  time.’ 

‘It  may,’  said  Strider. 


246  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

They  stood  for  a  while  silent  on  the  hill-top,  near  its  south¬ 
ward  edge.  In  that  lonely  place  Frodo  for  the  first  time  fully 
realized  his  homelessness  and  danger.  He  wished  bitterly  that 
his  fortune  had  left  him  in  the  quiet  and  beloved  Shire.  He 
stared  down  at  the  hateful  Road,  leading  back  westward  -  to 
his  home.  Suddenly  he  was  aware  that  two  black  specks  were 
moving  slowly  along  it,  going  westward;  and  looking  again 
he  saw  that  three  others  were  creeping  eastward  to  meet 
them.  He  gave  a  cry  and  clutched  Strider’s  arm. 

‘Look,’  he  said,  pointing  downwards. 

At  once  Strider  flung  himself  on  the  ground  behind  the 
ruined  circle,  pulling  Frodo  down  beside  him.  Merry  threw 
himself  alongside. 

‘What  is  it?’  he  whispered. 

‘I  do  not  know,  but  I  fear  the  worst,’  answered  Strider. 

Slowly  they  crawled  up  to  the  edge  of  the  ring  again,  and 
peered  through  a  cleft  between  two  jagged  stones.  The  light 
was  no  longer  bright,  for  the  clear  morning  had  faded,  and 
clouds  creeping  out  of  the  East  had  now  overtaken  the  sun, 
as  it  began  to  go  down.  They  could  all  see  the  black  specks, 
but  neither  Frodo  nor  Merry  could  make  out  their  shapes  for 
certain;  yet  something  told  them  that  there,  far  below,  were 
Black  Riders  assembling  on  the  Road  beyond  the  foot  of  the 
hill. 

‘Yes,’  said  Strider,  whose  keener  sight  left  him  in  no  doubt. 
‘The  enemy  is  here!’ 

Hastily  they  crept  away  and  slipped  down  the  north  side 
of  the  hill  to  find  their  companions. 

Sam  and  Peregrin  had  not  been  idle.  They  had  explored 
the  small  dell  and  the  surrounding  slopes.  Not  far  away  they 
found  a  spring  of  clear  water  in  the  hillside,  and  near  it 
footprints  not  more  than  a  day  or  two  old.  In  the  dell  itself 
they  found  recent  traces  of  a  fire,  and  other  signs  of  a  hasty 
camp.  There  were  some  fallen  rocks  on  the  edge  of  the  dell 
nearest  to  the  hill.  Behind  them  Sam  came  upon  a  small  store 
of  firewood  neatly  stacked. 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


247 


‘I  wonder  if  old  Gandalf  has  been  here,’  he  said  to  Pippin. 
‘Whoever  it  was  put  this  stuff  here  meant  to  come  back  it 
seems.’ 

Strider  was  greatly  interested  in  these  discoveries.  ‘I  wish  I 
had  waited  and  explored  the  ground  down  here  myself,’  he 
said,  hurrying  off  to  the  spring  to  examine  the  footprints. 

‘It  is  just  as  I  feared,’  he  said,  when  he  came  back.  ‘Sam 
and  Pippin  have  trampled  the  soft  ground,  and  the  marks  are 
spoilt  or  confused.  Rangers  have  been  here  lately.  It  is  they 
who  left  the  firewood  behind.  But  there  are  also  several  newer 
tracks  that  were  not  made  by  Rangers.  At  least  one  set  was 
made,  only  a  day  or  two  ago,  by  heavy  boots.  At  least  one.  I 
cannot  now  be  certain,  but  I  think  there  were  many  booted 
feet.’  He  paused  and  stood  in  anxious  thought. 

Each  of  the  hobbits  saw  in  his  mind  a  vision  of  the  cloaked 
and  booted  Riders.  If  the  horsemen  had  already  found  the  dell, 
the  sooner  Strider  led  them  somewhere  else  the  better.  Sam 
viewed  the  hollow  with  great  dislike,  now  that  he  had  heard 
news  of  their  enemies  on  the  Road,  only  a  few  miles  away. 

‘Hadn’t  we  better  clear  out  quick,  Mr.  Strider?’  he  asked 
impatiently.  ‘It  is  getting  late,  and  I  don’t  like  this  hole:  it 
makes  my  heart  sink  somehow.’ 

‘Yes,  we  certainly  must  decide  what  to  do  at  once,’ 
answered  Strider,  looking  up  and  considering  the  time  and 
the  weather.  ‘Well,  Sam,’  he  said  at  last,  ‘I  do  not  like  this 
place  either;  but  I  cannot  think  of  anywhere  better  that  we 
could  reach  before  nightfall.  At  least  we  are  out  of  sight  for 
the  moment,  and  if  we  moved  we  should  be  much  more  likely 
to  be  seen  by  spies.  All  we  could  do  would  be  to  go  right  out 
of  our  way  back  north  on  this  side  of  the  line  of  hills,  where 
the  land  is  all  much  the  same  as  it  is  here.  The  Road  is 
watched,  but  we  should  have  to  cross  it,  if  we  tried  to  take 
cover  in  the  thickets  away  to  the  south.  On  the  north  side  of 
the  Road  beyond  the  hills  the  country  is  bare  and  flat  for 
miles.’ 

‘Can  the  Riders  see ?’  asked  Merry.  ‘I  mean,  they  seem 
usually  to  have  used  their  noses  rather  than  their  eyes, 


248 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


smelling  for  us,  if  smelling  is  the  right  word,  at  least  in  the 
daylight.  But  you  made  us  lie  down  flat  when  you  saw  them 
down  below;  and  now  you  talk  of  being  seen,  if  we  move.’ 

‘I  was  too  careless  on  the  hill-top,’  answered  Strider.  ‘I  was 
very  anxious  to  find  some  sign  of  Gandalf;  but  it  was  a 
mistake  for  three  of  us  to  go  up  and  stand  there  so  long.  For 
the  black  horses  can  see,  and  the  Riders  can  use  men  and 
other  creatures  as  spies,  as  we  found  at  Bree.  They  themselves 
do  not  see  the  world  of  light  as  we  do,  but  our  shapes  cast 
shadows  in  their  minds,  which  only  the  noon  sun  destroys; 
and  in  the  dark  they  perceive  many  signs  and  forms  that  are 
hidden  from  us:  then  they  are  most  to  be  feared.  And  at  all 
times  they  smell  the  blood  of  living  things,  desiring  and  hating 
it.  Senses,  too,  there  are  other  than  sight  or  smell.  We  can 
feel  their  presence  -  it  troubled  our  hearts,  as  soon  as  we 
came  here,  and  before  we  saw  them;  they  feel  ours  more 
keenly.  Also,’  he  added,  and  his  voice  sank  to  a  whisper,  ‘the 
Ring  draws  them.’ 

‘Is  there  no  escape  then?’  said  Frodo,  looking  round  wildly. 
‘If  I  move  I  shall  be  seen  and  hunted!  If  I  stay,  I  shall  draw 
them  to  me!’ 

Strider  laid  his  hand  on  his  shoulder.  ‘There  is  still  hope,’  he 
said.  ‘You  are  not  alone.  Let  us  take  this  wood  that  is  set  ready 
for  the  fire  as  a  sign.  There  is  little  shelter  or  defence  here,  but 
fire  shall  serve  for  both.  Sauron  can  put  fire  to  his  evil  uses,  as 
he  can  all  things,  but  these  Riders  do  not  love  it,  and  fear  those 
who  wield  it.  Fire  is  our  friend  in  the  wilderness.’ 

‘Maybe,’  muttered  Sam.  ‘It  is  also  as  good  a  way  of  saying 
“here  we  are”  as  I  can  think  of,  bar  shouting.’ 

Down  in  the  lowest  and  most  sheltered  corner  of  the  dell 
they  lit  a  fire,  and  prepared  a  meal.  The  shades  of  evening 
began  to  fall,  and  it  grew  cold.  They  were  suddenly  aware 
of  great  hunger,  for  they  had  not  eaten  anything  since  break¬ 
fast;  but  they  dared  not  make  more  than  a  frugal  supper. 
The  lands  ahead  were  empty  of  all  save  birds  and  beasts, 
unfriendly  places  deserted  by  all  the  races  of  the  world. 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


249 


Rangers  passed  at  times  beyond  the  hills,  but  they  were  few 
and  did  not  stay.  Other  wanderers  were  rare,  and  of  evil  sort: 
trolls  might  stray  down  at  times  out  of  the  northern  valleys 
of  the  Misty  Mountains.  Only  on  the  Road  would  travellers 
be  found,  most  often  dwarves,  hurrying  along  on  business  of 
their  own,  and  with  no  help  and  few  words  to  spare  for 
strangers. 

‘I  don’t  see  how  our  food  can  be  made  to  last,’  said  Frodo. 
‘We  have  been  careful  enough  in  the  last  few  days,  and  this 
supper  is  no  feast;  but  we  have  used  more  than  we  ought,  if 
we  have  two  weeks  still  to  go,  and  perhaps  more.’ 

‘There  is  food  in  the  wild,’  said  Strider;  ‘berry,  root,  and 
herb;  and  I  have  some  skill  as  a  hunter  at  need.  You  need  not 
be  afraid  of  starving  before  winter  comes.  But  gathering  and 
catching  food  is  long  and  weary  work,  and  we  need  haste.  So 
tighten  your  belts,  and  think  with  hope  of  the  tables  of 
Elrond’s  house!’ 

The  cold  increased  as  darkness  came  on.  Peering  out  from 
the  edge  of  the  dell  they  could  see  nothing  but  a  grey  land 
now  vanishing  quickly  into  shadow.  The  sky  above  had 
cleared  again  and  was  slowly  filled  with  twinkling  stars.  Frodo 
and  his  companions  huddled  round  the  fire,  wrapped  in  every 
garment  and  blanket  they  possessed;  but  Strider  was  content 
with  a  single  cloak,  and  sat  a  little  apart,  drawing  thoughtfully 
at  his  pipe. 

As  night  fell  and  the  light  of  the  fire  began  to  shine  out 
brightly  he  began  to  tell  them  tales  to  keep  their  minds  from 
fear.  He  knew  many  histories  and  legends  of  long  ago,  of 
Elves  and  Men  and  the  good  and  evil  deeds  of  the  Elder 
Days.  They  wondered  how  old  he  was,  and  where  he  had 
learned  all  this  lore. 

‘Tell  us  of  Gil-galad,’  said  Merry  suddenly,  when  he 
paused  at  the  end  of  a  story  of  the  Elf-kingdoms.  ‘Do  you 
know  any  more  of  that  old  lay  that  you  spoke  of?’ 

‘I  do  indeed,’  answered  Strider.  ‘So  also  does  Frodo,  for  it 
concerns  us  closely.’  Merry  and  Pippin  looked  at  Frodo,  who 
was  staring  into  the  fire. 


250 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘I  know  only  the  little  that  Gandalf  has  told  me,’  said  Frodo 
slowly.  ‘Gil-galad  was  the  last  of  the  great  Elf-kings  of 
Middle-earth.  Gil-galad  is  Starlight  in  their  tongue.  With 
Elendil,  the  Elf-friend,  he  went  to  the  land  of - ’ 

‘No!’  said  Strider  interrupting,  ‘I  do  not  think  that  tale 
should  be  told  now  with  the  servants  of  the  Enemy  at  hand. 
If  we  win  through  to  the  house  of  Elrond,  you  may  hear  it 
there,  told  in  full.’ 

‘Then  tell  us  some  other  tale  of  the  old  days,’  begged  Sam; 
‘a  tale  about  the  Elves  before  the  fading  time.  I  would  dearly 
like  to  hear  more  about  Elves;  the  dark  seems  to  press  round 
so  close.’ 

‘I  will  tell  you  the  tale  of  Tinuviel,’  said  Strider,  ‘in  brief - 
for  it  is  a  long  tale  of  which  the  end  is  not  known;  and  there 
are  none  now,  except  Elrond,  that  remember  it  aright  as  it 
was  told  of  old.  It  is  a  fair  tale,  though  it  is  sad,  as  are  all  the 
tales  of  Middle-earth,  and  yet  it  may  lift  up  your  hearts.’  He 
was  silent  for  some  time,  and  then  he  began  not  to  speak  but 
to  chant  softly: 

The  leaves  were  long,  the  grass  was  green, 

The  hemlock-umbels  tall  and  fair, 

And  in  the  glade  a  light  was  seen 
Of  stars  in  shadow  shimmering. 

Tinuviel  was  dancing  there 
To  music  of  a  pipe  unseen, 

And  light  of  stars  was  in  her  hair, 

And  in  her  raiment  glimmering. 

There  Beren  came  from  mountains  cold, 

And  lost  he  wandered  under  leaves, 

And  where  the  Elven-river  rolled 
He  walked  alone  and  sorrowing. 

He  peered  between  the  hemlock-leaves 
And  saw  in  wonder  flowers  of  gold 
Upon  her  mantle  and  her  sleeves, 

And  her  hair  like  shadow  following. 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


251 


Enchantment  healed  his  weary  feet 
That  over  hills  were  doomed  to  roam; 
And  forth  he  hastened,  strong  and  fleet, 

And  grasped  at  moonbeams  glistening. 
Through  woven  woods  in  Elvenhome 
She  lightly  fled  on  dancing  feet, 

And  left  him  lonely  still  to  roam 
In  the  silent  forest  listening. 

He  heard  there  oft  the  flying  sound 
Of  feet  as  light  as  linden-leaves, 

Or  music  welling  underground, 

In  hidden  hollows  quavering. 

Now  withered  lay  the  hemlock-sheaves, 

And  one  by  one  with  sighing  sound 
Whispering  fell  the  beechen  leaves 
In  the  wintry  woodland  wavering. 

He  sought  her  ever,  wandering  far 

Where  leaves  of  years  were  thickly  strewn. 
By  light  of  moon  and  ray  of  star 
In  frosty  heavens  shivering. 

Her  mantle  glinted  in  the  moon, 

As  on  a  hill-top  high  and  far 
She  danced,  and  at  her  feet  was  strewn 
A  mist  of  silver  quivering. 

When  winter  passed,  she  came  again, 

And  her  song  released  the  sudden  spring, 
Like  rising  lark,  and  falling  rain, 

And  melting  water  bubbling. 

He  saw  the  elven-flowers  spring 
About  her  feet,  and  healed  again 
He  longed  by  her  to  dance  and  sing 
Upon  the  grass  untroubling. 


252 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Again  she  fled,  but  swift  he  came. 

Tiniwiel!  Tiniwiel! 

He  called  her  by  her  Elvish  name; 

And  there  she  halted  listening. 

One  moment  stood  she,  and  a  spell 
His  voice  laid  on  her:  Beren  came, 

And  doom  fell  on  Tiniwiel 

That  in  his  arms  lay  glistening. 

As  Beren  looked  into  her  eyes 
Within  the  shadows  of  her  hair, 

The  trembling  starlight  of  the  skies 
He  saw  there  mirrored  shimmering. 

Tiniwiel  the  elven-fair, 

Immortal  maiden  elven-wise, 

About  him  cast  her  shadowy  hair 
And  arms  like  silver  glimmering. 

Long  was  the  way  that  fate  them  bore, 

O’er  stony  mountains  cold  and  grey, 

Through  halls  of  iron  and  darkling  door. 

And  woods  of  nightshade  morrowless. 

The  Sundering  Seas  between  them  lay, 

And  yet  at  last  they  met  once  more, 

And  long  ago  they  passed  away 
In  the  forest  singing  sorrowless. 

Strider  sighed  and  paused  before  he  spoke  again.  ‘That  is 
a  song,’  he  said,  ‘in  the  mode  that  is  called  ann-thennath 
among  the  Elves,  but  is  hard  to  render  in  our  Common 
Speech,  and  this  is  but  a  rough  echo  of  it.  It  tells  of  the 
meeting  of  Beren  son  of  Barahir  and  Luthien  Timiviel.  Beren 
was  a  mortal  man,  but  Luthien  was  the  daughter  of  Thingol, 
a  King  of  Elves  upon  Middle-earth  when  the  world  was 
young;  and  she  was  the  fairest  maiden  that  has  ever  been 
among  all  the  children  of  this  world.  As  the  stars  above  the 
mists  of  the  Northern  lands  was  her  loveliness,  and  in  her 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


253 


face  was  a  shining  light.  In  those  days  the  Great  Enemy, 
of  whom  Sauron  of  Mordor  was  but  a  servant,  dwelt  in 
Angband  in  the  North,  and  the  Elves  of  the  West  coming 
back  to  Middle-earth  made  war  upon  him  to  regain  the 
Silmarils  which  he  had  stolen;  and  the  fathers  of  Men  aided 
the  Elves.  But  the  Enemy  was  victorious  and  Barahir  was 
slain,  and  Beren  escaping  through  great  peril  came  over  the 
Mountains  of  Terror  into  the  hidden  Kingdom  of  Thingol  in 
the  forest  of  Neldoreth.  There  he  beheld  Luthien  singing  and 
dancing  in  a  glade  beside  the  enchanted  river  Esgalduin;  and 
he  named  her  Tinuviel,  that  is  Nightingale  in  the  language 
of  old.  Many  sorrows  befell  them  afterwards,  and  they  were 
parted  long.  Tinuviel  rescued  Beren  from  the  dungeons  of 
Sauron,  and  together  they  passed  through  great  dangers,  and 
cast  down  even  the  Great  Enemy  from  his  throne,  and  took 
from  his  iron  crown  one  of  the  three  Silmarils,  brightest  of 
all  jewels,  to  be  the  bride-price  of  Luthien  to  Thingol  her 
father.  Yet  at  the  last  Beren  was  slain  by  the  Wolf  that  came 
from  the  gates  of  Angband,  and  he  died  in  the  arms  of 
Tinuviel.  But  she  chose  mortality,  and  to  die  from  the  world, 
so  that  she  might  follow  him;  and  it  is  sung  that  they  met 
again  beyond  the  Sundering  Seas,  and  after  a  brief  time  walk¬ 
ing  alive  once  more  in  the  green  woods,  together  they  passed, 
long  ago,  beyond  the  confines  of  this  world.  So  it  is  that 
Luthien  Tinuviel  alone  of  the  Elf-kindred  has  died  indeed 
and  left  the  world,  and  they  have  lost  her  whom  they  most 
loved.  But  from  her  the  lineage  of  the  Elf-lords  of  old 
descended  among  Men.  There  live  still  those  of  whom 
Luthien  was  the  foremother,  and  it  is  said  that  her  line  shall 
never  fail.  Elrond  of  Rivendell  is  of  that  Kin.  For  of  Beren 
and  Luthien  was  born  Dior  Thingol’s  heir;  and  of  him  Elwing 
the  White  whom  Earendil  wedded,  he  that  sailed  his  ship  out 
of  the  mists  of  the  world  into  the  seas  of  heaven  with  the 
Silmaril  upon  his  brow.  And  of  Earendil  came  the  Kings  of 
Numenor,  that  is  Westernesse.’ 

As  Strider  was  speaking  they  watched  his  strange  eager 
face,  dimly  lit  in  the  red  glow  of  the  wood-fire.  His  eyes 


254 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


shone,  and  his  voice  was  rich  and  deep.  Above  him  was  a 
black  starry  sky.  Suddenly  a  pale  light  appeared  over  the 
crown  of  Weathertop  behind  him.  The  waxing  moon  was 
climbing  slowly  above  the  hill  that  overshadowed  them,  and 
the  stars  above  the  hill-top  faded. 

The  story  ended.  The  hobbits  moved  and  stretched. 
‘Look!’  said  Merry.  ‘The  Moon  is  rising:  it  must  be  getting 
late.’ 

The  others  looked  up.  Even  as  they  did  so,  they  saw  on 
the  top  of  the  hill  something  small  and  dark  against  the  glim¬ 
mer  of  the  moonrise.  It  was  perhaps  only  a  large  stone  or 
jutting  rock  shown  up  by  the  pale  light. 

Sam  and  Merry  got  up  and  walked  away  from  the  fire. 
Frodo  and  Pippin  remained  seated  in  silence.  Strider  was 
watching  the  moonlight  on  the  hill  intently.  All  seemed  quiet 
and  still,  but  Frodo  felt  a  cold  dread  creeping  over  his  heart, 
now  that  Strider  was  no  longer  speaking.  He  huddled  closer 
to  the  fire.  At  that  moment  Sam  came  running  back  from  the 
edge  of  the  dell. 

‘I  don’t  know  what  it  is,’  he  said,  ‘but  I  suddenly  felt  afraid. 
I  durstn’t  go  outside  this  dell  for  any  money;  I  felt  that  some¬ 
thing  was  creeping  up  the  slope.’ 

‘Did  you  see  anything?’  asked  Frodo,  springing  to  his  feet. 

‘No,  sir.  I  saw  nothing,  but  I  didn’t  stop  to  look.’ 

‘I  saw  something,’  said  Merry;  ‘or  I  thought  I  did  -  away 
westwards  where  the  moonlight  was  falling  on  the  flats 
beyond  the  shadow  of  the  hill-tops,  I  thought  there  were  two 
or  three  black  shapes.  They  seemed  to  be  moving  this  way.’ 

‘Keep  close  to  the  fire,  with  your  faces  outward!’  cried 
Strider.  ‘Get  some  of  the  longer  sticks  ready  in  your  hands!’ 

For  a  breathless  time  they  sat  there,  silent  and  alert,  with 
their  backs  turned  to  the  wood-fire,  each  gazing  into  the 
shadows  that  encircled  them.  Nothing  happened.  There  was 
no  sound  or  movement  in  the  night.  Frodo  stirred,  feeling 
that  he  must  break  the  silence:  he  longed  to  shout  out  aloud. 

‘Hush!’  whispered  Strider.  ‘What’s  that?’  gasped  Pippin  at 
the  same  moment. 


A  KNIFE  IN  THE  DARK 


255 


Over  the  lip  of  the  little  dell,  on  the  side  away  from  the 
hill,  they  felt,  rather  than  saw,  a  shadow  rise,  one  shadow  or 
more  than  one.  They  strained  their  eyes,  and  the  shadows 
seemed  to  grow.  Soon  there  could  be  no  doubt:  three  or  four 
tall  black  figures  were  standing  there  on  the  slope,  looking 
down  on  them.  So  black  were  they  that  they  seemed  like 
black  holes  in  the  deep  shade  behind  them.  Frodo  thought 
that  he  heard  a  faint  hiss  as  of  venomous  breath  and  felt  a 
thin  piercing  chill.  Then  the  shapes  slowly  advanced. 

Terror  overcame  Pippin  and  Merry,  and  they  threw  them¬ 
selves  flat  on  the  ground.  Sam  shrank  to  Frodo’s  side.  Frodo 
was  hardly  less  terrified  than  his  companions;  he  was  quaking 
as  if  he  was  bitter  cold,  but  his  terror  was  swallowed  up  in  a 
sudden  temptation  to  put  on  the  Ring.  The  desire  to  do  this 
laid  hold  of  him,  and  he  could  think  of  nothing  else.  He 
did  not  forget  the  Barrow,  nor  the  message  of  Gandalf; 
but  something  seemed  to  be  compelling  him  to  disregard 
all  warnings,  and  he  longed  to  yield.  Not  with  the  hope  of 
escape,  or  of  doing  anything,  either  good  or  bad:  he  simply 
felt  that  he  must  take  the  Ring  and  put  it  on  his  finger.  He 
could  not  speak.  He  felt  Sam  looking  at  him,  as  if  he  knew 
that  his  master  was  in  some  great  trouble,  but  he  could  not 
turn  towards  him.  He  shut  his  eyes  and  struggled  for  a  while; 
but  resistance  became  unbearable,  and  at  last  he  slowly  drew 
out  the  chain,  and  slipped  the  Ring  on  the  forefinger  of  his 
left  hand. 

Immediately,  though  everything  else  remained  as  before, 
dim  and  dark,  the  shapes  became  terribly  clear.  He  was  able 
to  see  beneath  their  black  wrappings.  There  were  five  tall 
figures:  two  standing  on  the  lip  of  the  dell,  three  advancing. 
In  their  white  faces  burned  keen  and  merciless  eyes;  under 
their  mantles  were  long  grey  robes;  upon  their  grey  hairs  were 
helms  of  silver;  in  their  haggard  hands  were  swords  of  steel. 
Their  eyes  fell  on  him  and  pierced  him,  as  they  rushed 
towards  him.  Desperate,  he  drew  his  own  sword,  and  it 
seemed  to  him  that  it  flickered  red,  as  if  it  was  a  firebrand. 
Two  of  the  figures  halted.  The  third  was  taller  than  the  others: 


256 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


his  hair  was  long  and  gleaming  and  on  his  helm  was  a  crown. 
In  one  hand  he  held  a  long  sword,  and  in  the  other  a  knife; 
both  the  knife  and  the  hand  that  held  it  glowed  with  a  pale 
light.  He  sprang  forward  and  bore  down  on  Frodo. 

At  that  moment  Frodo  threw  himself  forward  on  the 
ground,  and  he  heard  himself  crying  aloud:  O  Elbereth! 
Gilthoniel!  At  the  same  time  he  struck  at  the  feet  of  his  enemy. 
A  shrill  cry  rang  out  in  the  night;  and  he  felt  a  pain  like  a  dart 
of  poisoned  ice  pierce  his  left  shoulder.  Even  as  he  swooned 
he  caught,  as  through  a  swirling  mist,  a  glimpse  of  Strider 
leaping  out  of  the  darkness  with  a  flaming  brand  of  wood  in 
either  hand.  With  a  last  effort  Frodo,  dropping  his  sword, 
slipped  the  Ring  from  his  finger  and  closed  his  right  hand 
tight  upon  it. 


Chapter  12 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


When  Frodo  came  to  himself  he  was  still  clutching  the  Ring 
desperately.  He  was  lying  by  the  fire,  which  was  now  piled 
high  and  burning  brightly.  His  three  companions  were  bend¬ 
ing  over  him. 

What  has  happened?  Where  is  the  pale  king?’  he  asked 
wildly. 

They  were  too  overjoyed  to  hear  him  speak  to  answer  for 
a  while;  nor  did  they  understand  his  question.  At  length  he 
gathered  from  Sam  that  they  had  seen  nothing  but  the  vague 
shadowy  shapes  coming  towards  them.  Suddenly  to  his 
horror  Sam  found  that  his  master  had  vanished;  and  at  that 
moment  a  black  shadow  rushed  past  him,  and  he  fell.  He 
heard  Frodo’s  voice,  but  it  seemed  to  come  from  a  great 
distance,  or  from  under  the  earth,  crying  out  strange  words. 
They  saw  nothing  more,  until  they  stumbled  over  the  body 
of  Frodo,  lying  as  if  dead,  face  downwards  on  the  grass  with 
his  sword  beneath  him.  Strider  ordered  them  to  pick  him  up 
and  lay  him  near  the  fire,  and  then  he  disappeared.  That  was 
now  a  good  while  ago. 

Sam  plainly  was  beginning  to  have  doubts  again  about 
Strider;  but  while  they  were  talking  he  returned,  appearing 
suddenly  out  of  the  shadows.  They  started,  and  Sam  drew 
his  sword  and  stood  over  Frodo;  but  Strider  knelt  down 
swiftly  at  his  side. 

‘I  am  not  a  Black  Rider,  Sam,’  he  said  gently,  ‘nor  in  league 
with  them.  I  have  been  trying  to  discover  something  of  their 
movements;  but  I  have  found  nothing.  I  cannot  think  why 
they  have  gone  and  do  not  attack  again.  But  there  is  no  feeling 
of  their  presence  anywhere  at  hand.’ 

When  he  heard  what  Frodo  had  to  tell,  he  became  full  of 


258 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


concern,  and  shook  his  head  and  sighed.  Then  he  ordered 
Pippin  and  Merry  to  heat  as  much  water  as  they  could  in 
their  small  kettles,  and  to  bathe  the  wound  with  it.  ‘Keep  the 
fire  going  well,  and  keep  Frodo  warm!’  he  said.  Then  he 
got  up  and  walked  away,  and  called  Sam  to  him.  ‘I  think  I 
understand  things  better  now,’  he  said  in  a  low  voice.  ‘There 
seem  only  to  have  been  five  of  the  enemy.  Why  they  were 
not  all  here,  I  don’t  know;  but  I  don’t  think  they  expected  to 
be  resisted.  They  have  drawn  off  for  the  time  being.  But  not 
far,  I  fear.  They  will  come  again  another  night,  if  we  cannot 
escape.  They  are  only  waiting,  because  they  think  that  their 
purpose  is  almost  accomplished,  and  that  the  Ring  cannot  fly 
much  further.  I  fear,  Sam,  that  they  believe  your  master  has 
a  deadly  wound  that  will  subdue  him  to  their  will.  We  shall 
see!’ 

Sam  choked  with  tears.  ‘Don’t  despair!’  said  Strider.  ‘You 
must  trust  me  now.  Your  Frodo  is  made  of  sterner  stuff  than 
I  had  guessed,  though  Gandalf  hinted  that  it  might  prove  so. 
He  is  not  slain,  and  I  think  he  will  resist  the  evil  power  of  the 
wound  longer  than  his  enemies  expect.  I  will  do  all  I  can  to 
help  and  heal  him.  Guard  him  well,  while  I  am  away!’  He 
hurried  off  and  disappeared  again  into  the  darkness. 

Frodo  dozed,  though  the  pain  of  his  wound  was  slowly 
growing,  and  a  deadly  chill  was  spreading  from  his  shoulder 
to  his  arm  and  side.  His  friends  watched  over  him,  warming 
him,  and  bathing  his  wound.  The  night  passed  slowly  and 
wearily.  Dawn  was  growing  in  the  sky,  and  the  dell  was  filling 
with  grey  light,  when  Strider  at  last  returned. 

‘Look!’  he  cried;  and  stooping  he  lifted  from  the  ground  a 
black  cloak  that  had  lain  there  hidden  by  the  darkness.  A  foot 
above  the  lower  hem  there  was  a  slash.  ‘This  was  the  stroke 
of  Frodo’s  sword,’  he  said.  ‘The  only  hurt  that  it  did  to  his 
enemy,  I  fear;  for  it  is  unharmed,  but  all  blades  perish  that 
pierce  that  dreadful  King.  More  deadly  to  him  was  the  name 
of  Elbereth.’ 

‘And  more  deadly  to  Frodo  was  this!’  He  stooped  again 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


259 


and  lifted  up  a  long  thin  knife.  There  was  a  cold  gleam  in  it. 
As  Strider  raised  it  they  saw  that  near  the  end  its  edge  was 
notched  and  the  point  was  broken  off.  But  even  as  he  held  it 
up  in  the  growing  light,  they  gazed  in  astonishment,  for  the 
blade  seemed  to  melt,  and  vanished  like  a  smoke  in  the  air, 
leaving  only  the  hilt  in  Strider’s  hand.  ‘Alas!’  he  cried.  ‘It  was 
this  accursed  knife  that  gave  the  wound.  Few  now  have  the 
skill  in  healing  to  match  such  evil  weapons.  But  I  will  do  what 
I  can.’ 

He  sat  down  on  the  ground,  and  taking  the  dagger-hilt  laid 
it  on  his  knees,  and  he  sang  over  it  a  slow  song  in  a  strange 
tongue.  Then  setting  it  aside,  he  turned  to  Frodo  and  in  a 
soft  tone  spoke  words  the  others  could  not  catch.  From  the 
pouch  at  his  belt  he  drew  out  the  long  leaves  of  a  plant. 

‘These  leaves,’  he  said,  ‘I  have  walked  far  to  find;  for 
this  plant  does  not  grow  in  the  bare  hills;  but  in  the  thickets 
away  south  of  the  Road  I  found  it  in  the  dark  by  the  scent 
of  its  leaves.’  He  crushed  a  leaf  in  his  fingers,  and  it  gave  out 
a  sweet  and  pungent  fragrance.  ‘It  is  fortunate  that  I  could 
find  it,  for  it  is  a  healing  plant  that  the  Men  of  the  West 
brought  to  Middle-earth.  Athelas  they  named  it,  and  it  grows 
now  sparsely  and  only  near  places  where  they  dwelt  or 
camped  of  old;  and  it  is  not  known  in  the  North,  except  to 
some  of  those  who  wander  in  the  Wild.  It  has  great  virtues, 
but  over  such  a  wound  as  this  its  healing  powers  may  be 
small.’ 

He  threw  the  leaves  into  boiling  water  and  bathed  Frodo’s 
shoulder.  The  fragrance  of  the  steam  was  refreshing,  and 
those  that  were  unhurt  felt  their  minds  calmed  and  cleared. 
The  herb  had  also  some  power  over  the  wound,  for  Frodo 
felt  the  pain  and  also  the  sense  of  frozen  cold  lessen  in  his 
side;  but  the  life  did  not  return  to  his  arm,  and  he  could  not 
raise  or  use  his  hand.  He  bitterly  regretted  his  foolishness, 
and  reproached  himself  for  weakness  of  will;  for  he  now 
perceived  that  in  putting  on  the  Ring  he  obeyed  not  his 
own  desire  but  the  commanding  wish  of  his  enemies.  He 
wondered  if  he  would  remain  maimed  for  life,  and  how  they 


260 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


would  now  manage  to  continue  their  journey.  He  felt  too 
weak  to  stand. 

The  others  were  discussing  this  very  question.  They 
quickly  decided  to  leave  Weathertop  as  soon  as  possible.  ‘I 
think  now,’  said  Strider,  ‘that  the  enemy  has  been  watching 
this  place  for  some  days.  If  Gandalf  ever  came  here,  then  he 
must  have  been  forced  to  ride  away,  and  he  will  not  return. 
In  any  case  we  are  in  great  peril  here  after  dark,  since  the 
attack  of  last  night,  and  we  can  hardly  meet  greater  danger 
wherever  we  go.’ 

As  soon  as  the  daylight  was  full,  they  had  some  hurried 
food  and  packed.  It  was  impossible  for  Frodo  to  walk,  so  they 
divided  the  greater  part  of  their  baggage  among  the  four  of 
them,  and  put  Frodo  on  the  pony.  In  the  last  few  days  the 
poor  beast  had  improved  wonderfully;  it  already  seemed  fat¬ 
ter  and  stronger,  and  had  begun  to  show  an  affection  for  its 
new  masters,  especially  for  Sam.  Bill  Ferny’s  treatment  must 
have  been  very  hard  for  the  journey  in  the  wild  to  seem  so 
much  better  than  its  former  life. 

They  started  off  in  a  southerly  direction.  This  would  mean 
crossing  the  Road,  but  it  was  the  quickest  way  to  more 
wooded  country.  And  they  needed  fuel;  for  Strider  said  that 
Frodo  must  be  kept  warm,  especially  at  night,  while  fire 
would  be  some  protection  for  them  all.  It  was  also  his  plan 
to  shorten  their  journey  by  cutting  across  another  great  loop 
of  the  Road:  east  beyond  Weathertop  it  changed  its  course 
and  took  a  wide  bend  northwards. 

They  made  their  way  slowly  and  cautiously  round  the 
south-western  slopes  of  the  hill,  and  came  in  a  little  while  to 
the  edge  of  the  Road.  There  was  no  sign  of  the  Riders.  But 
even  as  they  were  hurrying  across  they  heard  far  away  two 
cries:  a  cold  voice  calling  and  a  cold  voice  answering.  Trem¬ 
bling  they  sprang  forward,  and  made  for  the  thickets  that  lay 
ahead.  The  land  before  them  sloped  away  southwards,  but  it 
was  wild  and  pathless;  bushes  and  stunted  trees  grew  in  dense 
patches  with  wide  barren  spaces  in  between.  The  grass  was 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


26l 


scanty,  coarse,  and  grey;  and  the  leaves  in  the  thickets  were 
faded  and  falling.  It  was  a  cheerless  land,  and  their  journey 
was  slow  and  gloomy.  They  spoke  little  as  they  trudged 
along.  Frodo’s  heart  was  grieved  as  he  watched  them  walking 
beside  him  with  their  heads  down,  and  their  backs  bowed 
under  their  burdens.  Even  Strider  seemed  tired  and  heavy- 
hearted. 

Before  the  first  day’s  march  was  over  Frodo’s  pain  began 
to  grow  again,  but  he  did  not  speak  of  it  for  a  long  time.  Four 
days  passed,  without  the  ground  or  the  scene  changing 
much,  except  that  behind  them  Weathertop  slowly  sank,  and 
before  them  the  distant  mountains  loomed  a  little  nearer.  Yet 
since  that  far  cry  they  had  seen  and  heard  no  sign  that  the 
enemy  had  marked  their  flight  or  followed  them.  They 
dreaded  the  dark  hours,  and  kept  watch  in  pairs  by  night, 
expecting  at  any  time  to  see  black  shapes  stalking  in  the 
grey  night,  dimly  lit  by  the  cloud-veiled  moon;  but  they  saw 
nothing,  and  heard  no  sound  but  the  sigh  of  withered  leaves 
and  grass.  Not  once  did  they  feel  the  sense  of  present  evil 
that  had  assailed  them  before  the  attack  in  the  dell.  It  seemed 
too  much  to  hope  that  the  Riders  had  already  lost  their  trail 
again.  Perhaps  they  were  waiting  to  make  some  ambush  in  a 
narrow  place? 

At  the  end  of  the  fifth  day  the  ground  began  once  more  to 
rise  slowly  out  of  the  wide  shallow  valley  into  which  they  had 
descended.  Strider  now  turned  their  course  again  north¬ 
eastwards,  and  on  the  sixth  day  they  reached  the  top  of  a 
long  slow-climbing  slope,  and  saw  far  ahead  a  huddle  of 
wooded  hills.  Away  below  them  they  could  see  the  Road 
sweeping  round  the  feet  of  the  hills;  and  to  their  right  a  grey 
river  gleamed  pale  in  the  thin  sunshine.  In  the  distance  they 
glimpsed  yet  another  river  in  a  stony  valley  half-veiled  in 
mist. 

‘I  am  afraid  we  must  go  back  to  the  Road  here  for  a  while,’ 
said  Strider.  ‘We  have  now  come  to  the  River  Hoarwell,  that 
the  Elves  call  Mitheithel.  It  flows  down  out  of  the  Ettenmoors, 
the  troll-fells  north  of  Rivendell,  and  joins  the  Loudwater 


262 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


away  in  the  South.  Some  call  it  the  Greyflood  after  that.  It  is 
a  great  water  before  it  finds  the  Sea.  There  is  no  way  over  it 
below  its  sources  in  the  Ettenmoors,  except  by  the  Last 
Bridge  on  which  the  Road  crosses.’ 

‘What  is  that  other  river  we  can  see  far  away  there?’  asked 
Merry. 

‘That  is  Loudwater,  the  Bruinen  of  Rivendell,’  answered 
Strider.  ‘The  Road  runs  along  the  edge  of  the  hills  for  many 
miles  from  the  Bridge  to  the  Ford  of  Bruinen.  But  I  have  not 
yet  thought  how  we  shall  cross  that  water.  One  river  at  a 
time!  We  shall  be  fortunate  indeed  if  we  do  not  find  the  Last 
Bridge  held  against  us.’ 

Next  day,  early  in  the  morning,  they  came  down  again  to 
the  borders  of  the  Road.  Sam  and  Strider  went  forward,  but 
they  found  no  sign  of  any  travellers  or  riders.  Here  under  the 
shadow  of  the  hills  there  had  been  some  rain.  Strider  judged 
that  it  had  fallen  two  days  before,  and  had  washed  away  all 
footprints.  No  horseman  had  passed  since  then,  as  far  as  he 
could  see. 

They  hurried  along  with  all  the  speed  they  could  make, 
and  after  a  mile  or  two  they  saw  the  Last  Bridge  ahead,  at 
the  bottom  of  a  short  steep  slope.  They  dreaded  to  see  black 
figures  waiting  there,  but  they  saw  none.  Strider  made  them 
take  cover  in  a  thicket  at  the  side  of  the  Road,  while  he  went 
forward  to  explore. 

Before  long  he  came  hurrying  back.  ‘I  can  see  no  sign  of 
the  enemy,’  he  said,  ‘and  I  wonder  very  much  what  that 
means.  But  I  have  found  something  very  strange.’ 

He  held  out  his  hand,  and  showed  a  single  pale-green  jewel. 
‘I  found  it  in  the  mud  in  the  middle  of  the  Bridge,’  he  said. 
‘It  is  a  beryl,  an  elf-stone.  Whether  it  was  set  there,  or  let  fall 
by  chance,  I  cannot  say;  but  it  brings  hope  to  me.  I  will  take 
it  as  a  sign  that  we  may  pass  the  Bridge;  but  beyond  that  I 
dare  not  keep  to  the  Road,  without  some  clearer  token.’ 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


263 


At  once  they  went  on  again.  They  crossed  the  Bridge  in 
safety,  hearing  no  sound  but  the  water  swirling  against  its 
three  great  arches.  A  mile  further  on  they  came  to  a  narrow 
ravine  that  led  away  northwards  through  the  steep  lands  on 
the  left  of  the  Road.  Here  Strider  turned  aside,  and  soon  they 
were  lost  in  a  sombre  country  of  dark  trees  winding  among 
the  feet  of  sullen  hills. 

The  hobbits  were  glad  to  leave  the  cheerless  lands  and 
the  perilous  Road  behind  them;  but  this  new  country  seemed 
threatening  and  unfriendly.  As  they  went  forward  the  hills 
about  them  steadily  rose.  Here  and  there  upon  heights  and 
ridges  they  caught  glimpses  of  ancient  walls  of  stone,  and 
the  ruins  of  towers:  they  had  an  ominous  look.  Frodo,  who 
was  not  walking,  had  time  to  gaze  ahead  and  to  think.  He 
recalled  Bilbo’s  account  of  his  journey  and  the  threatening 
towers  on  the  hills  north  of  the  Road,  in  the  country  near 
the  Trolls’  wood  where  his  first  serious  adventure  had 
happened.  Frodo  guessed  that  they  were  now  in  the  same 
region,  and  wondered  if  by  chance  they  would  pass  near 
the  spot. 

‘Who  lives  in  this  land?’  he  asked.  ‘And  who  built  these 
towers?  Is  this  troll-country?’ 

‘No!’  said  Strider.  ‘Trolls  do  not  build.  No  one  fives  in  this 
land.  Men  once  dwelt  here,  ages  ago;  but  none  remain  now. 
They  became  an  evil  people,  as  legends  tell,  for  they  fell 
under  the  shadow  of  Angmar.  But  all  were  destroyed  in  the 
war  that  brought  the  North  Kingdom  to  its  end.  But  that  is 
now  so  long  ago  that  the  hills  have  forgotten  them,  though  a 
shadow  still  lies  on  the  land.’ 

‘Where  did  you  learn  such  tales,  if  all  the  land  is  empty 
and  forgetful?’  asked  Peregrin.  ‘The  birds  and  beasts  do  not 
tell  tales  of  that  sort.’ 

‘The  heirs  of  Elendil  do  not  forget  all  things  past,’  said 
Sttider;  ‘and  many  more  things  than  I  can  tell  are  remem¬ 
bered  in  Rivendell.’ 

‘Have  you  often  been  to  Rivendell?’  said  Frodo. 

‘I  have,’  said  Strider.  ‘I  dwelt  there  once,  and  still  I  return 


264  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

when  I  may.  There  my  heart  is;  but  it  is  not  my  fate  to  sit  in 
peace,  even  in  the  fair  house  of  Elrond.’ 

The  hills  now  began  to  shut  them  in.  The  Road  behind 
held  on  its  way  to  the  River  Bruinen,  but  both  were  now 
hidden  from  view.  The  travellers  came  into  a  long  valley; 
narrow,  deeply  cloven,  dark  and  silent.  Trees  with  old  and 
twisted  roots  hung  over  cliffs,  and  piled  up  behind  into 
mounting  slopes  of  pine-wood. 

The  hobbits  grew  very  weary.  They  advanced  slowly,  for 
they  had  to  pick  their  way  through  a  pathless  country,  encum¬ 
bered  by  fallen  trees  and  tumbled  rocks.  As  long  as  they  could 
they  avoided  climbing  for  Frodo’s  sake,  and  because  it  was 
in  fact  difficult  to  find  any  way  up  out  of  the  narrow  dales. 
They  had  been  two  days  in  this  country  when  the  weather 
turned  wet.  The  wind  began  to  blow  steadily  out  of  the  West 
and  pour  the  water  of  the  distant  seas  on  the  dark  heads  of 
the  hills  in  fine  drenching  rain.  By  nightfall  they  were  all 
soaked,  and  their  camp  was  cheerless,  for  they  could  not  get 
any  fire  to  burn.  The  next  day  the  hills  rose  still  higher  and 
steeper  before  them,  and  they  were  forced  to  turn  away  north¬ 
wards  out  of  their  course.  Strider  seemed  to  be  getting  anxi¬ 
ous:  they  were  nearly  ten  days  out  from  Weathertop,  and 
their  stock  of  provisions  was  beginning  to  run  low.  It  went 
on  raining. 

That  night  they  camped  on  a  stony  shelf  with  a  rock-wall 
behind  them,  in  which  there  was  a  shallow  cave,  a  mere  scoop 
in  the  cliff.  Frodo  was  restless.  The  cold  and  wet  had  made 
his  wound  more  painful  than  ever,  and  the  ache  and  sense  of 
deadly  chill  took  away  all  sleep.  He  lay  tossing  and  turning 
and  listening  fearfully  to  the  stealthy  night-noises:  wind  in 
chinks  of  rock,  water  dripping,  a  crack,  the  sudden  rattling 
fall  of  a  loosened  stone.  He  felt  that  black  shapes  were 
advancing  to  smother  him;  but  when  he  sat  up  he  saw  nothing 
but  the  back  of  Strider  sitting  hunched  up,  smoking  his  pipe, 
and  watching.  He  lay  down  again  and  passed  into  an  uneasy 
dream,  in  which  he  walked  on  the  grass  in  his  garden  in  the 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD  265 

Shire,  but  it  seemed  faint  and  dim,  less  clear  than  the  tall 
black  shadows  that  stood  looking  over  the  hedge. 

In  the  morning  he  woke  to  find  that  the  rain  had  stopped. 
The  clouds  were  still  thick,  but  they  were  breaking,  and  pale 
strips  of  blue  appeared  between  them.  The  wind  was  shifting 
again.  They  did  not  start  early.  Immediately  after  their  cold 
and  comfortless  breakfast  Strider  went  off  alone,  telling  the 
others  to  remain  under  the  shelter  of  the  cliff,  until  he  came 
back.  He  was  going  to  climb  up,  if  he  could,  and  get  a  look 
at  the  lie  of  the  land. 

When  he  returned  he  was  not  reassuring.  We  have  come 
too  far  to  the  north,’  he  said,  ‘and  we  must  find  some  way  to 
turn  back  southwards  again.  If  we  keep  on  as  we  are  going 
we  shall  get  up  into  the  Ettendales  far  north  of  Rivendell. 
That  is  troll-country,  and  little  known  to  me.  We  could  per¬ 
haps  find  our  way  through  and  come  round  to  Rivendell 
from  the  north;  but  it  would  take  too  long,  for  I  do  not  know 
the  way,  and  our  food  would  not  last.  So  somehow  or  other 
we  must  find  the  Ford  of  Bruinen.’ 

The  rest  of  that  day  they  spent  scrambling  over  rocky 
ground.  They  found  a  passage  between  two  hills  that  led 
them  into  a  valley  running  south-east,  the  direction  that  they 
wished  to  take;  but  towards  the  end  of  the  day  they  found 
their  road  again  barred  by  a  ridge  of  high  land;  its  dark  edge 
against  the  sky  was  broken  into  many  bare  points  like  teeth 
of  a  blunted  saw.  They  had  a  choice  between  going  back  or 
climbing  over  it. 

They  decided  to  attempt  the  climb,  but  it  proved  very 
difficult.  Before  long  Frodo  was  obliged  to  dismount  and 
struggle  along  on  foot.  Even  so  they  often  despaired  of  getting 
their  pony  up,  or  indeed  of  finding  a  path  for  themselves, 
burdened  as  they  were.  The  light  was  nearly  gone,  and  they 
were  all  exhausted,  when  at  last  they  reached  the  top.  They 
had  climbed  on  to  a  narrow  saddle  between  two  higher  points, 
and  the  land  fell  steeply  away  again,  only  a  short  distance 
ahead.  Frodo  threw  himself  down,  and  lay  on  the  ground 


266 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


shivering.  His  left  arm  was  lifeless,  and  his  side  and  shoulder 
felt  as  if  icy  claws  were  laid  upon  them.  The  trees  and  rocks 
about  him  seemed  shadowy  and  dim. 

‘We  cannot  go  any  further,’  said  Merry  to  Strider.  ‘I  am 
afraid  this  has  been  too  much  for  Frodo.  I  am  dreadfully 
anxious  about  him.  What  are  we  to  do?  Do  you  think  they 
will  be  able  to  cure  him  in  Rivendell,  if  we  ever  get  there?’ 

We  shall  see,’  answered  Strider.  ‘There  is  nothing  more 
that  I  can  do  in  the  wilderness;  and  it  is  chiefly  because  of 
his  wound  that  I  am  so  anxious  to  press  on.  But  I  agree  that 
we  can  go  no  further  tonight.’ 

What  is  the  matter  with  my  master?’  asked  Sam  in  a  low 
voice,  looking  appealingly  at  Strider.  ‘His  wound  was  small, 
and  it  is  already  closed.  There’s  nothing  to  be  seen  but  a  cold 
white  mark  on  his  shoulder.’ 

‘Frodo  has  been  touched  by  the  weapons  of  the  Enemy,’ 
said  Strider,  ‘and  there  is  some  poison  or  evil  at  work  that 
is  beyond  my  skill  to  drive  out.  But  do  not  give  up  hope, 
Sam!’ 

Night  was  cold  up  on  the  high  ridge.  They  lit  a  small  fire 
down  under  the  gnarled  roots  of  an  old  pine,  that  hung  over 
a  shallow  pit:  it  looked  as  if  stone  had  once  been  quarried 
there.  They  sat  huddled  together.  The  wind  blew  chill 
through  the  pass,  and  they  heard  the  tree-tops  lower  down 
moaning  and  sighing.  Frodo  lay  half  in  a  dream,  imagining 
that  endless  dark  wings  were  sweeping  by  above  him,  and 
that  on  the  wings  rode  pursuers  that  sought  him  in  all  the 
hollows  of  the  hills. 

The  morning  dawned  bright  and  fair;  the  air  was  clean, 
and  the  light  pale  and  clear  in  a  rain-washed  sky.  Their  hearts 
were  encouraged,  but  they  longed  for  the  sun  to  warm  their 
cold  stiff  limbs.  As  soon  as  it  was  light,  Strider  took  Merry 
with  him  and  went  to  survey  the  country  from  the  height  to 
the  east  of  the  pass.  The  sun  had  risen  and  was  shining 
brightly  when  he  returned  with  more  comforting  news.  They 
were  now  going  more  or  less  in  the  right  direction.  If  they 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


267 


went  on,  down  the  further  side  of  the  ridge,  they  would 
have  the  Mountains  on  their  left.  Some  way  ahead  Strider 
had  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  Loudwater  again,  and  he  knew 
that,  though  it  was  hidden  from  view,  the  Road  to  the  Ford 
was  not  far  from  the  River  and  lay  on  the  side  nearest  to 
them. 

‘We  must  make  for  the  Road  again,’  he  said.  We  cannot 
hope  to  find  a  path  through  these  hills.  Whatever  danger  may 
beset  it,  the  Road  is  our  only  way  to  the  Ford.’ 

As  soon  as  they  had  eaten  they  set  out  again.  They  climbed 
slowly  down  the  southern  side  of  the  ridge;  but  the  way  was 
much  easier  than  they  had  expected,  for  the  slope  was  far 
less  steep  on  this  side,  and  before  long  Frodo  was  able  to 
ride  again.  Bill  Ferny’s  poor  old  pony  was  developing  an 
unexpected  talent  for  picking  out  a  path,  and  for  sparing  its 
rider  as  many  jolts  as  possible.  The  spirits  of  the  party  rose 
again.  Even  Frodo  felt  better  in  the  morning  light,  but  every 
now  and  again  a  mist  seemed  to  obscure  his  sight,  and  he 
passed  his  hands  over  his  eyes. 

Pippin  was  a  little  ahead  of  the  others.  Suddenly  he  turned 
round  and  called  to  them.  ‘There  is  a  path  here!’  he  cried. 

When  they  came  up  with  him,  they  saw  that  he  had  made 
no  mistake:  there  were  clearly  the  beginnings  of  a  path,  that 
climbed  with  many  windings  out  of  the  woods  below  and 
faded  away  on  the  hill-top  behind.  In  places  it  was  now  faint 
and  overgrown,  or  choked  with  fallen  stones  and  trees;  but 
at  one  time  it  seemed  to  have  been  much  used.  It  was  a  path 
made  by  strong  arms  and  heavy  feet.  Here  and  there  old  trees 
had  been  cut  or  broken  down,  and  large  rocks  cloven  or 
heaved  aside  to  make  a  way. 

They  followed  the  track  for  some  while,  for  it  offered  much 
the  easiest  way  down,  but  they  went  cautiously,  and  their 
anxiety  increased  as  they  came  into  the  dark  woods,  and  the 
path  grew  plainer  and  broader.  Suddenly  coming  out  of  a 
belt  of  fir-trees  it  ran  steeply  down  a  slope,  and  turned  sharply 
to  the  left  round  the  corner  of  a  rocky  shoulder  of  the  hill. 


268 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


When  they  came  to  the  corner  they  looked  round  and  saw 
that  the  path  ran  on  over  a  level  strip  under  the  face  of  a  low 
cliff  overhung  with  trees.  In  the  stony  wall  there  was  a  door 
hanging  crookedly  ajar  upon  one  great  hinge. 

Outside  the  door  they  all  halted.  There  was  a  cave  or 
rock-chamber  behind,  but  in  the  gloom  inside  nothing  could 
be  seen.  Strider,  Sam,  and  Merry  pushing  with  all  their 
strength  managed  to  open  the  door  a  little  wider,  and  then 
Strider  and  Merry  went  in.  They  did  not  go  far,  for  on  the 
floor  lay  many  old  bones,  and  nothing  else  was  to  be  seen 
near  the  entrance  except  some  great  empty  jars  and  broken 
pots. 

‘Surely  this  is  a  troll-hole,  if  ever  there  was  one!’  said 
Pippin.  ‘Come  out,  you  two,  and  let  us  get  away.  Now  we 
know  who  made  the  path  -  and  we  had  better  get  off  it  quick.’ 

‘There  is  no  need,  I  think,’  said  Strider,  coming  out.  ‘It  is 
certainly  a  troll-hole,  but  it  seems  to  have  been  long  forsaken. 
I  don’t  think  we  need  be  afraid.  But  let  us  go  on  down  warily, 
and  we  shall  see.’ 

The  path  went  on  again  from  the  door,  and  turning  to  the 
right  again  across  the  level  space  plunged  down  a  thick 
wooded  slope.  Pippin,  not  liking  to  show  Strider  that  he  was 
still  afraid,  went  on  ahead  with  Merry.  Sam  and  Strider  came 
behind,  one  on  each  side  of  Frodo’s  pony,  for  the  path  was 
now  broad  enough  for  four  or  five  hobbits  to  walk  abreast. 
But  they  had  not  gone  very  far  before  Pippin  came  running 
back,  followed  by  Merry.  They  both  looked  terrified. 

‘There  are  trolls!’  Pippin  panted.  ‘Down  in  a  clearing  in 
the  woods  not  far  below.  We  got  a  sight  of  them  through  the 
tree-trunks.  They  are  very  large!’ 

‘We  will  come  and  look  at  them,’  said  Strider,  picking  up 
a  stick.  Frodo  said  nothing,  but  Sam  looked  scared. 

The  sun  was  now  high,  and  it  shone  down  through  the 
half-stripped  branches  of  the  trees,  and  lit  the  clearing  with 
bright  patches  of  light.  They  halted  suddenly  on  the  edge, 
and  peered  through  the  tree-trunks,  holding  their  breath. 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD  269 

There  stood  the  trolls:  three  large  trolls.  One  was  stooping, 
and  the  other  two  stood  staring  at  him. 

Strider  walked  forward  unconcernedly.  ‘Get  up,  old  stone!’ 
he  said,  and  broke  his  stick  upon  the  stooping  troll. 

Nothing  happened.  There  was  a  gasp  of  astonishment 
from  the  hobbits,  and  then  even  Frodo  laughed.  ‘Well!’  he 
said.  ‘We  are  forgetting  our  family  history!  These  must  be 
the  very  three  that  were  caught  by  Gandalf,  quarrelling  over 
the  right  way  to  cook  thirteen  dwarves  and  one  hobbit.’ 

‘I  had  no  idea  we  were  anywhere  near  the  place!’  said 
Pippin.  He  knew  the  story  well.  Bilbo  and  Frodo  had  told  it 
often;  but  as  a  matter  of  fact  he  had  never  more  than  half 
believed  it.  Even  now  he  looked  at  the  stone  trolls  with  sus¬ 
picion,  wondering  if  some  magic  might  not  suddenly  bring 
them  to  life  again. 

‘You  are  forgetting  not  only  your  family  history,  but  all 
you  ever  knew  about  trolls,’  said  Strider.  ‘It  is  broad  daylight 
with  a  bright  sun,  and  yet  you  come  back  trying  to  scare  me 
with  a  tale  of  live  trolls  waiting  for  us  in  this  glade!  In  any 
case  you  might  have  noticed  that  one  of  them  has  an  old 
bird’s  nest  behind  his  ear.  That  would  be  a  most  unusual 
ornament  for  a  live  troll!’ 

They  all  laughed.  Frodo  felt  his  spirits  reviving:  the  re¬ 
minder  of  Bilbo’s  first  successful  adventure  was  heartening. 
The  sun,  too,  was  warm  and  comforting,  and  the  mist  before 
his  eyes  seemed  to  be  lifting  a  little.  They  rested  for  some 
time  in  the  glade,  and  took  their  mid-day  meal  right  under 
the  shadow  of  the  trolls’  large  legs. 

‘Won’t  somebody  give  us  a  bit  of  a  song,  while  the  sun  is 
high?’  said  Merry,  when  they  had  finished.  ‘We  haven’t  had 
a  song  or  a  tale  for  days.’ 

‘Not  since  Weathertop,’  said  Frodo.  The  others  looked  at 
him.  ‘Don’t  worry  about  me!’  he  added.  ‘I  feel  much  better, 
but  I  don’t  think  I  could  sing.  Perhaps  Sam  could  dig  some¬ 
thing  out  of  his  memory.’ 

‘Come  on,  Sam!’  said  Merry.  ‘There’s  more  stored  in  your 
head  than  you  let  on  about.’ 


270 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘I  don’t  know  about  that,’  said  Sam.  ‘But  how  would  this 
suit?  It  ain’t  what  I  call  proper  poetry,  if  you  understand  me: 
just  a  bit  of  nonsense.  But  these  old  images  here  brought  it 
to  my  mind.’  Standing  up,  with  his  hands  behind  his  back, 
as  if  he  was  at  school,  he  began  to  sing  to  an  old  tune. 

Troll  sat  alone  on  his  seat  of  stone, 

And  munched  and  mumbled  a  bare  old  bone; 

For  many  a  year  he  had  gnawed  it  near, 

For  meat  was  hard  to  come  by. 

Done  by!  Gum  by! 

In  a  cave  in  the  hills  he  dwelt  alone, 

And  meat  was  hard  to  come  by. 

Up  came  Tom  with  his  big  boots  on. 

Said  he  to  Troll:  ‘Pray,  what  is  yon? 

For  it  looks  like  the  shin  o’  my  nuncle  Tim, 

As  should  be  a-lyin ’  in  graveyard. 

Caveyard!  Paveyard! 

This  many  a  year  has  Tim  been  gone, 

And  I  thought  he  were  lyin’  in  graveyard.’ 

‘My  lad,’  said  Troll,  ‘this  bone  I  stole. 

But  what  be  bones  that  lie  in  a  hole? 

Thy  nuncle  was  dead  as  a  lump  o’  lead, 

Afore  I  found  his  shinbone. 

Tinbone!  Thinbone! 

He  can  spare  a  share  for  a  poor  old  troll, 

For  he  don’t  need  his  shinbone.’ 

Said  Tom:  7  don’t  see  why  the  likes  o’  thee 
Without  axin’  leave  should  go  makin’  free 
With  the  shank  or  the  shin  o’  my  father’s  kin; 

So  hand  the  old  bone  over! 

Rover!  Trover! 

Though  dead  he  be,  it  belongs  to  he; 

So  hand  the  old  bone  over!’ 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


271 


For  a  couple  o’  pins,’  says  Troll,  and  grins, 

‘I’ll  eat  thee  too,  and  gnaw  thy  shins. 

A  bit  0’  fresh  meat  will  go  down  sweet! 

I’ll  try  my  teeth  on  thee  now. 

Hee  now!  See  now! 

I’m  tired  o’  gnawing  old  bones  and  skins; 

I’ve  a  mind  to  dine  on  thee  now.  ’ 

But  just  as  he  thought,  his  dinner  was  caught, 

He  found  his  hands  had  hold  of  naught. 

Before  he  could  mind,  Tom  slipped  behind 
And  gave  him  the  boot  to  larn  him. 

Warn  him!  Darn  him! 

A  bump  o’  the  boot  on  the  seat,  Tom  thought, 

Would  be  the  way  to  larn  him. 

But  harder  than  stone  is  the  flesh  and  bone 
Of  a  troll  that  sits  in  the  hills  alone. 

As  well  set  your  boot  to  the  mountain’s  root, 

For  the  seat  of  a  troll  don’t  feel  it. 

Peel  it!  Heal  it! 

Old  Troll  laughed,  when  he  heard  Tom  groan, 

And  he  knew  his  toes  could  feel  it. 

Tom’s  leg  is  game,  since  home  he  came, 

And  his  bootless  foot  is  lasting  lame; 

But  Troll  don’t  care,  and  he’s  still  there 
With  the  bone  he  boned  from  its  owner. 

Doner!  Boner! 

Troll’s  old  seat  is  still  the  same, 

And  the  bone  he  boned  from  its  owner! 

‘Well,  that’s  a  warning  to  us  all!’  laughed  Merry.  ‘It  is  as 
well  you  used  a  stick,  and  not  your  hand,  Strider!’ 

‘Where  did  you  come  by  that,  Sam?’  asked  Pippin.  ‘I’ve 
never  heard  those  words  before.’ 

Sam  muttered  something  inaudible.  ‘It’s  out  of  his  own 


272  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

head,  of  course,’  said  Frodo.  ‘I  am  learning  a  lot  about  Sam 
Gamgee  on  this  journey.  First  he  was  a  conspirator,  now  he’s 
a  jester.  He’ll  end  up  by  becoming  a  wizard  -  or  a  warrior!’ 

‘I  hope  not,’  said  Sam.  ‘I  don’t  want  to  be  neither!’ 

In  the  afternoon  they  went  on  down  the  woods.  They  were 
probably  following  the  very  track  that  Gandalf,  Bilbo,  and 
the  dwarves  had  used  many  years  before.  After  a  few  miles 
they  came  out  on  the  top  of  a  high  bank  above  the  Road.  At 
this  point  the  Road  had  left  the  Hoarwell  far  behind  in  its 
narrow  valley,  and  now  clung  close  to  the  feet  of  the  hills, 
rolling  and  winding  eastward  among  woods  and  heather- 
covered  slopes  towards  the  Ford  and  the  Mountains.  Not  far 
down  the  bank  Strider  pointed  out  a  stone  in  the  grass.  On 
it  roughly  cut  and  now  much  weathered  could  still  be  seen 
dwarf-runes  and  secret  marks. 

‘There!’  said  Merry.  ‘That  must  be  the  stone  that  marked 
the  place  where  the  trolls’  gold  was  hidden.  How  much  is  left 
of  Bilbo’s  share,  I  wonder,  Frodo?’ 

Frodo  looked  at  the  stone,  and  wished  that  Bilbo  had 
brought  home  no  treasure  more  perilous,  nor  less  easy  to  part 
with.  ‘None  at  all,’  he  said.  ‘Bilbo  gave  it  all  away.  He  told 
me  he  did  not  feel  it  was  really  his,  as  it  came  from  robbers.’ 

The  Road  lay  quiet  under  the  long  shadows  of  early 
evening.  There  was  no  sign  of  any  other  travellers  to  be  seen. 
As  there  was  now  no  other  possible  course  for  them  to  take, 
they  climbed  down  the  bank,  and  turning  left  went  off  as  fast 
as  they  could.  Soon  a  shoulder  of  the  hills  cut  off  the  light  of 
the  fast  westering  sun.  A  cold  wind  flowed  down  to  meet 
them  from  the  mountains  ahead. 

They  were  beginning  to  look  out  for  a  place  off  the  Road, 
where  they  could  camp  for  the  night,  when  they  heard  a 
sound  that  brought  sudden  fear  back  into  their  hearts:  the 
noise  of  hoofs  behind  them.  They  looked  back,  but  they  could 
not  see  far  because  of  the  many  windings  and  rollings  of  the 
Road.  As  quickly  as  they  could  they  scrambled  off  the  beaten 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


273 


way  and  up  into  the  deep  heather  and  bilberry  brushwood 
on  the  slopes  above,  until  they  came  to  a  small  patch  of 
thick-growing  hazels.  As  they  peered  out  from  among  the 
bushes,  they  could  see  the  Road,  faint  and  grey  in  the  failing 
light,  some  thirty  feet  below  them.  The  sound  of  hoofs  drew 
nearer.  They  were  going  fast,  with  a  light  clippety-clippety-clip. 
Then  faintly,  as  if  it  was  blown  away  from  them  by  the  breeze, 
they  seemed  to  catch  a  dim  ringing,  as  of  small  bells  tinkling. 

‘That  does  not  sound  like  a  Black  Rider’s  horse!’  said 
Frodo,  listening  intently.  The  other  hobbits  agreed  hopefully 
that  it  did  not,  but  they  all  remained  full  of  suspicion.  They 
had  been  in  fear  of  pursuit  for  so  long  that  any  sound  from 
behind  seemed  ominous  and  unfriendly.  But  Strider  was  now 
leaning  forward,  stooped  to  the  ground,  with  a  hand  to  his 
ear,  and  a  look  of  joy  on  his  face. 

The  light  faded,  and  the  leaves  on  the  bushes  rustled  softly. 
Clearer  and  nearer  now  the  bells  jingled,  and  clippety-clip 
came  the  quick  trotting  feet.  Suddenly  into  view  below  came 
a  white  horse,  gleaming  in  the  shadows,  running  swiftly.  In 
the  dusk  its  headstall  flickered  and  flashed,  as  if  it  were  stud¬ 
ded  with  gems  like  living  stars.  The  rider’s  cloak  streamed 
behind  him,  and  his  hood  was  thrown  back;  his  golden  hair 
flowed  shimmering  in  the  wind  of  his  speed.  To  Frodo  it 
appeared  that  a  white  light  was  shining  through  the  form  and 
raiment  of  the  rider,  as  if  through  a  thin  veil. 

Strider  sprang  from  hiding  and  dashed  down  towards  the 
Road,  leaping  with  a  cry  through  the  heather;  but  even  before 
he  had  moved  or  called,  the  rider  had  reined  in  his  horse  and 
halted,  looking  up  towards  the  thicket  where  they  stood. 
When  he  saw  Strider,  he  dismounted  and  ran  to  meet  him 
calling  out:  Ai  na  vedui  Dunadan!  Mae  govannen!  His  speech 
and  clear  ringing  voice  left  no  doubt  in  their  hearts:  the  rider 
was  of  the  Elven-folk.  No  others  that  dwelt  in  the  wide  world 
had  voices  so  fair  to  hear.  But  there  seemed  to  be  a  note  of 
haste  or  fear  in  his  call,  and  they  saw  that  he  was  now  speaking 
quickly  and  urgently  to  Strider. 

Soon  Strider  beckoned  to  them,  and  the  hobbits  left  the 


274  THE  fellowship  of  the  ring 

bushes  and  hurried  down  to  the  Road.  ‘This  is  Glorfindel, 
who  dwells  in  the  house  of  Elrond,’  said  Strider. 

‘Hail,  and  well  met  at  last!’  said  the  Elf-lord  to  Frodo.  ‘I 
was  sent  from  Rivendell  to  look  for  you.  We  feared  that  you 
were  in  danger  upon  the  road.’ 

‘Then  Gandalf  has  reached  Rivendell?’  cried  Frodo 
joyfully. 

‘No.  He  had  not  when  I  departed;  but  that  was  nine  days 
ago,’  answered  Glorfindel.  ‘Elrond  received  news  that 
troubled  him.  Some  of  my  kindred,  journeying  in  your  land 
beyond  the  Baranduin,*  learned  that  things  were  amiss,  and 
sent  messages  as  swiftly  as  they  could.  They  said  that  the 
Nine  were  abroad,  and  that  you  were  astray  bearing  a  great 
burden  without  guidance,  for  Gandalf  had  not  returned. 
There  are  few  even  in  Rivendell  that  can  ride  openly  against 
the  Nine;  but  such  as  there  were,  Elrond  sent  out  north,  west, 
and  south.  It  was  thought  that  you  might  turn  far  aside  to 
avoid  pursuit,  and  become  lost  in  the  Wilderness. 

‘It  was  my  lot  to  take  the  Road,  and  I  came  to  the  Bridge 
of  Mitheithel,  and  left  a  token  there,  nigh  on  seven  days  ago. 
Three  of  the  servants  of  Sauron  were  upon  the  Bridge,  but 
they  withdrew  and  I  pursued  them  westward.  I  came  also 
upon  two  others,  but  they  turned  away  southward.  Since  then 
I  have  searched  for  your  trail.  Two  days  ago  I  found  it,  and 
followed  it  over  the  Bridge;  and  today  I  marked  where  you 
descended  from  the  hills  again.  But  come!  There  is  no  time 
for  further  news.  Since  you  are  here  we  must  risk  the  peril  of 
the  Road  and  go.  There  are  five  behind  us,  and  when  they 
find  your  trail  upon  the  Road  they  will  ride  after  us  like  the 
wind.  And  they  are  not  all.  Where  the  other  four  may  be,  I 
do  not  know.  I  fear  that  we  may  find  the  Ford  is  already  held 
against  us.’ 

While  Glorfindel  was  speaking  the  shades  of  evening  deep¬ 
ened.  Frodo  felt  a  great  weariness  come  over  him.  Ever  since 
the  sun  began  to  sink  the  mist  before  his  eyes  had  darkened, 


The  Brandywine  River. 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


275 


and  he  felt  that  a  shadow  was  coming  between  him  and  the 
faces  of  his  friends.  Now  pain  assailed  him,  and  he  felt  cold. 
He  swayed,  clutching  at  Sam’s  arm. 

‘My  master  is  sick  and  wounded,’  said  Sam  angrily.  ‘He 
can’t  go  on  riding  after  nightfall.  He  needs  rest.’ 

Glorhndel  caught  Frodo  as  he  sank  to  the  ground,  and 
taking  him  gently  in  his  arms  he  looked  in  his  face  with  grave 
anxiety. 

Briefly  Strider  told  of  the  attack  on  their  camp  under 
Weathertop,  and  of  the  deadly  knife.  He  drew  out  the  hilt, 
which  he  had  kept,  and  handed  it  to  the  Elf.  Glorfindel 
shuddered  as  he  took  it,  but  he  looked  intently  at  it. 

‘There  are  evil  things  written  on  this  hilt,’  he  said;  ‘though 
maybe  your  eyes  cannot  see  them.  Keep  it,  Aragorn,  till  we 
reach  the  house  of  Elrond!  But  be  wary,  and  handle  it  as  little 
as  you  may!  Alas!  the  wounds  of  this  weapon  are  beyond  my 
skill  to  heal.  I  will  do  what  I  can  -  but  all  the  more  do  I  urge 
you  now  to  go  on  without  rest.’ 

He  searched  the  wound  on  Frodo’s  shoulder  with  his 
fingers,  and  his  face  grew  graver,  as  if  what  he  learned  dis¬ 
quieted  him.  But  Frodo  felt  the  chill  lessen  in  his  side  and 
arm;  a  little  warmth  crept  down  from  his  shoulder  to  his 
hand,  and  the  pain  grew  easier.  The  dusk  of  evening  seemed 
to  grow  lighter  about  him,  as  if  a  cloud  had  been  withdrawn. 
He  saw  his  friends’  faces  more  clearly  again,  and  a  measure 
of  new  hope  and  strength  returned. 

‘You  shall  ride  my  horse,’  said  Glorfindel.  ‘I  will  shorten 
the  stirrups  up  to  the  saddle-skirts,  and  you  must  sit  as  tight 
as  you  can.  But  you  need  not  fear:  my  horse  will  not  let  any 
rider  fall  that  I  command  him  to  bear.  His  pace  is  light  and 
smooth;  and  if  danger  presses  too  near,  he  will  bear  you  away 
with  a  speed  that  even  the  black  steeds  of  the  enemy  cannot 
rival.’ 

‘No,  he  will  not!’  said  Frodo.  ‘I  shall  not  ride  him,  if  I  am 
to  be  carried  off  to  Rivendell  or  anywhere  else,  leaving  my 
friends  behind  in  danger.’ 

Glorfindel  smiled.  ‘I  doubt  very  much,’  he  said,  ‘if  your 


276 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


friends  would  be  in  danger  if  you  were  not  with  them!  The 
pursuit  would  follow  you  and  leave  us  in  peace,  I  think.  It  is 
you,  Frodo,  and  that  which  you  bear  that  brings  us  all  in 
peril.’ 

To  that  Frodo  had  no  answer,  and  he  was  persuaded  to 
mount  Glorfindel’s  white  horse.  The  pony  was  laden  instead 
with  a  great  part  of  the  others’  burdens,  so  that  they  now 
marched  lighter,  and  for  a  time  made  good  speed;  but  the 
hobbits  began  to  find  it  hard  to  keep  up  with  the  swift  tireless 
feet  of  the  Elf.  On  he  led  them,  into  the  mouth  of  darkness, 
and  still  on  under  the  deep  clouded  night.  There  was  neither 
star  nor  moon.  Not  until  the  grey  of  dawn  did  he  allow  them 
to  halt.  Pippin,  Merry,  and  Sam  were  by  that  time  nearly 
asleep  on  their  stumbling  legs;  and  even  Strider  seemed  by 
the  sag  of  his  shoulders  to  be  weary.  Frodo  sat  upon  the  horse 
in  a  dark  dream. 

They  cast  themselves  down  in  the  heather  a  few  yards 
from  the  road-side,  and  fell  asleep  immediately.  They  seemed 
hardly  to  have  closed  their  eyes  when  Glorfindel,  who  had 
set  himself  to  watch  while  they  slept,  awoke  them  again.  The 
sun  had  now  climbed  far  into  the  morning,  and  the  clouds 
and  mists  of  the  night  were  gone. 

‘Drink  this!’  said  Glorfindel  to  them,  pouring  for  each  in 
turn  a  little  liquor  from  his  silver-studded  flask  of  leather.  It 
was  clear  as  spring  water  and  had  no  taste,  and  it  did  not  feel 
either  cool  or  warm  in  the  mouth;  but  strength  and  vigour 
seemed  to  flow  into  all  their  limbs  as  they  drank  it.  Eaten 
after  that  draught  the  stale  bread  and  dried  fruit  (which  was 
now  all  that  they  had  left)  seemed  to  satisfy  their  hunger 
better  than  many  a  good  breakfast  in  the  Shire  had  done. 

They  had  rested  rather  less  than  five  hours  when  they  took 
to  the  Road  again.  Glorfindel  still  urged  them  on,  and  only 
allowed  two  brief  halts  during  the  day’s  march.  In  this  way 
they  covered  almost  twenty  miles  before  nightfall,  and  came 
to  a  point  where  the  Road  bent  right  and  ran  down  towards 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


277 


the  bottom  of  the  valley,  now  making  straight  for  the  Bruinen. 
So  far  there  had  been  no  sign  or  sound  of  pursuit  that  the 
hobbits  could  see  or  hear;  but  often  Glorfindel  would  halt 
and  listen  for  a  moment,  if  they  lagged  behind,  and  a  look  of 
anxiety  clouded  his  face.  Once  or  twice  he  spoke  to  Strider 
in  the  elf-tongue. 

But  however  anxious  their  guides  might  be,  it  was  plain 
that  the  hobbits  could  go  no  further  that  night.  They  were 
stumbling  along  dizzy  with  weariness,  and  unable  to  think  of 
anything  but  their  feet  and  legs.  Frodo’s  pain  had  redoubled, 
and  during  the  day  things  about  him  faded  to  shadows  of 
ghostly  grey.  Fie  almost  welcomed  the  coming  of  night,  for 
then  the  world  seemed  less  pale  and  empty. 

The  hobbits  were  still  weary,  when  they  set  out  again  early 
next  morning.  There  were  many  miles  yet  to  go  between 
them  and  the  Ford,  and  they  hobbled  forward  at  the  best 
pace  they  could  manage. 

‘Our  peril  will  be  greatest  just  ere  we  reach  the  river,’  said 
Glorfindel;  ‘for  my  heart  warns  me  that  the  pursuit  is  now 
swift  behind  us,  and  other  danger  may  be  waiting  by  the 
Ford.’ 

The  Road  was  still  running  steadily  downhill,  and  there 
was  now  in  places  much  grass  at  either  side,  in  which  the 
hobbits  walked  when  they  could,  to  ease  their  tired  feet.  In 
the  late  afternoon  they  came  to  a  place  where  the  Road  went 
suddenly  under  the  dark  shadow  of  tall  pine-trees,  and  then 
plunged  into  a  deep  cutting  with  steep  moist  walls  of  red 
stone.  Echoes  ran  along  as  they  hurried  forward;  and  there 
seemed  to  be  a  sound  of  many  footfalls  following  their  own. 
All  at  once,  as  if  through  a  gate  of  light,  the  Road  ran  out 
again  from  the  end  of  the  tunnel  into  the  open.  There  at  the 
bottom  of  a  sharp  incline  they  saw  before  them  a  long  flat 
mile,  and  beyond  that  the  Ford  of  Rivendell.  On  the  further 
side  was  a  steep  brown  bank,  threaded  by  a  winding  path; 
and  behind  that  the  tall  mountains  climbed,  shoulder  above 
shoulder,  and  peak  beyond  peak,  into  the  fading  sky. 


278 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


There  was  still  an  echo  as  of  following  feet  in  the  cutting 
behind  them;  a  rushing  noise  as  if  a  wind  were  rising  and 
pouring  through  the  branches  of  the  pines.  One  moment 
Glorfmdel  turned  and  listened,  then  he  sprang  forward  with 
a  loud  cry. 

‘Fly!’  he  called.  ‘Fly!  The  enemy  is  upon  us!’ 

The  white  horse  leaped  forward.  The  hobbits  ran  down 
the  slope.  Glorfmdel  and  Strider  followed  as  rearguard.  They 
were  only  half  way  across  the  flat,  when  suddenly  there  was 
a  noise  of  horses  galloping.  Out  of  the  gate  in  the  trees  that 
they  had  just  left  rode  a  Black  Rider.  He  reined  his  horse  in, 
and  halted,  swaying  in  his  saddle.  Another  followed  him,  and 
then  another;  then  again  two  more. 

‘Ride  forward!  Ride!’  cried  Glorfindel  to  Frodo. 

He  did  not  obey  at  once,  for  a  strange  reluctance  seized 
him.  Checking  the  horse  to  a  walk,  he  turned  and  looked 
back.  The  Riders  seemed  to  sit  upon  their  great  steeds  like 
threatening  statues  upon  a  hill,  dark  and  solid,  while  all  the 
woods  and  land  about  them  receded  as  if  into  a  mist.  Sud¬ 
denly  he  knew  in  his  heart  that  they  were  silently  command¬ 
ing  him  to  wait.  Then  at  once  fear  and  hatred  awoke  in  him. 
His  hand  left  the  bridle  and  gripped  the  hilt  of  his  sword,  and 
with  a  red  flash  he  drew  it. 

‘Ride  on!  Ride  on!’  cried  Glorfmdel,  and  then  loud  and 
clear  he  called  to  the  horse  in  the  elf-tongue:  now  lim,  now 
lim,  Asfaloth! 

At  once  the  white  horse  sprang  away  and  sped  like  the 
wind  along  the  last  lap  of  the  Road.  At  the  same  moment  the 
black  horses  leaped  down  the  hill  in  pursuit,  and  from 
the  Riders  came  a  terrible  cry,  such  as  Frodo  had  heard  filling 
the  woods  with  horror  in  the  Eastfarthing  far  away.  It  was 
answered;  and  to  the  dismay  of  Frodo  and  his  friends  out 
from  the  trees  and  rocks  away  on  the  left  four  other  Riders 
came  flying.  Two  rode  towards  Frodo;  two  galloped  madly 
towards  the  Ford  to  cut  off  his  escape.  They  seemed  to  him 
to  run  like  the  wind  and  to  grow  swiftly  larger  and  darker,  as 
their  courses  converged  with  his. 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


279 


Frodo  looked  back  for  a  moment  over  his  shoulder.  He 
could  no  longer  see  his  friends.  The  Riders  behind  were 
falling  back:  even  their  great  steeds  were  no  match  in  speed 
for  the  white  elf-horse  of  Glorfindel.  He  looked  forward 
again,  and  hope  faded.  There  seemed  no  chance  of  reaching 
the  Ford  before  he  was  cut  off  by  the  others  that  had  lain  in 
ambush.  He  could  see  them  clearly  now:  they  appeared  to 
have  cast  aside  their  hoods  and  black  cloaks,  and  they  were 
robed  in  white  and  grey.  Swords  were  naked  in  their  pale 
hands;  helms  were  on  their  heads.  Their  cold  eyes  glittered, 
and  they  called  to  him  with  fell  voices. 

Fear  now  filled  all  Frodo’s  mind.  He  thought  no  longer  of 
his  sword.  No  cry  came  from  him.  He  shut  his  eyes  and  clung 
to  the  horse’s  mane.  The  wind  whistled  in  his  ears,  and  the 
bells  upon  the  harness  rang  wild  and  shrill.  A  breath  of  deadly 
cold  pierced  him  like  a  spear,  as  with  a  last  spurt,  like  a  flash 
of  white  fire,  the  elf-horse  speeding  as  if  on  wings,  passed 
right  before  the  face  of  the  foremost  Rider. 

Frodo  heard  the  splash  of  water.  It  foamed  about  his  feet. 
He  felt  the  quick  heave  and  surge  as  the  horse  left  the  river 
and  struggled  up  the  stony  path.  He  was  climbing  the  steep 
bank.  He  was  across  the  Ford. 

But  the  pursuers  were  close  behind.  At  the  top  of  the 
bank  the  horse  halted  and  turned  about  neighing  fiercely. 
There  were  Nine  Riders  at  the  water’s  edge  below,  and 
Frodo’s  spirit  quailed  before  the  threat  of  their  uplifted  faces. 
He  knew  of  nothing  that  would  prevent  them  from  crossing 
as  easily  as  he  had  done;  and  he  felt  that  it  was  useless  to 
try  to  escape  over  the  long  uncertain  path  from  the  Ford  to 
the  edge  of  Rivendell,  if  once  the  Riders  crossed.  In  any 
case  he  felt  that  he  was  commanded  urgently  to  halt.  Hatred 
again  stirred  in  him,  but  he  had  no  longer  the  strength  to 
refuse. 

Suddenly  the  foremost  Rider  spurred  his  horse  forward.  It 
checked  at  the  water  and  reared  up.  With  a  great  effort  Frodo 
sat  upright  and  brandished  his  sword. 

‘Go  back!’  he  cried.  ‘Go  back  to  the  Land  of  Mordor,  and 


280 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


follow  me  no  more!’  His  voice  sounded  thin  and  shrill  in  his 
own  ears.  The  Riders  halted,  but  Frodo  had  not  the  power 
of  Bombadil.  His  enemies  laughed  at  him  with  a  harsh  and 
chilling  laughter.  ‘Come  back!  Come  back!’  they  called.  ‘To 
Mordor  we  will  take  you!’ 

‘Go  back!’  he  whispered. 

‘The  Ring!  The  Ring!’  they  cried  with  deadly  voices;  and 
immediately  their  leader  urged  his  horse  forward  into  the 
water,  followed  closely  by  two  others. 

‘By  Elbereth  and  Luthien  the  Fair,’  said  Frodo  with  a  last 
effort,  lifting  up  his  sword,  ‘you  shall  have  neither  the  Ring 
nor  me!’ 

Then  the  leader,  who  was  now  half  across  the  Ford,  stood 
up  menacing  in  his  stirrups,  and  raised  up  his  hand.  Frodo 
was  stricken  dumb.  He  felt  his  tongue  cleave  to  his  mouth, 
and  his  heart  labouring.  His  sword  broke  and  fell  out  of 
his  shaking  hand.  The  elf-horse  reared  and  snorted.  The 
foremost  of  the  black  horses  had  almost  set  foot  upon  the 
shore. 

At  that  moment  there  came  a  roaring  and  a  rushing:  a  noise 
of  loud  waters  rolling  many  stones.  Dimly  Frodo  saw  the 
river  below  him  rise,  and  down  along  its  course  there  came  a 
plumed  cavalry  of  waves.  White  flames  seemed  to  Frodo  to 
flicker  on  their  crests,  and  he  half  fancied  that  he  saw  amid 
the  water  white  riders  upon  white  horses  with  frothing 
manes.  The  three  Riders  that  were  still  in  the  midst  of  the 
Ford  were  overwhelmed:  they  disappeared,  buried  suddenly 
under  angry  foam.  Those  that  were  behind  drew  back  in 
dismay. 

With  his  last  failing  senses  Frodo  heard  cries,  and  it  seemed 
to  him  that  he  saw,  beyond  the  Riders  that  hesitated  on  the 
shore,  a  shining  figure  of  white  light;  and  behind  it  ran  small 
shadowy  forms  waving  flames,  that  flared  red  in  the  grey  mist 
that  was  falling  over  the  world. 

The  black  horses  were  filled  with  madness,  and  leaping 
forward  in  terror  they  bore  their  riders  into  the  rushing  flood. 
Their  piercing  cries  were  drowned  in  the  roaring  of  the  river 


FLIGHT  TO  THE  FORD 


28l 


as  it  carried  them  away.  Then  Frodo  felt  himself  falling,  and 
the  roaring  and  confusion  seemed  to  rise  and  engulf  him 
together  with  his  enemies.  He  heard  and  saw  no  more. 


BOOK  TWO 


Chapter  I 


MANY  MEETINGS 


Frodo  woke  and  found  himself  lying  in  bed.  At  first  he 
thought  that  he  had  slept  late,  after  a  long  unpleasant  dream 
that  still  hovered  on  the  edge  of  memory.  Or  perhaps  he  had 
been  ill?  But  the  ceiling  looked  strange;  it  was  flat,  and  it  had 
dark  beams  richly  carved.  Fie  lay  a  little  while  longer  looking 
at  patches  of  sunlight  on  the  wall,  and  listening  to  the  sound 
of  a  waterfall. 

‘Where  am  I,  and  what  is  the  time?’  he  said  aloud  to  the 
ceiling. 

‘In  the  house  of  Elrond,  and  it  is  ten  o’clock  in  the  morn¬ 
ing,’  said  a  voice.  ‘It  is  the  morning  of  October  the  twenty- 
fourth,  if  you  want  to  know.’ 

‘Gandalf !’  criedFrodo,  sittingup.  There  was  the  old  wizard, 
sitting  in  a  chair  by  the  open  window. 

‘Yes,’  he  said,  ‘I  am  here.  And  you  are  lucky  to  be  here, 
too,  after  all  the  absurd  things  you  have  done  since  you  left 
home.’ 

Frodo  lay  down  again.  He  felt  too  comfortable  and  peaceful 
to  argue,  and  in  any  case  he  did  not  think  he  would  get  the 
better  of  an  argument.  He  was  fully  awake  now,  and  the 
memory  of  his  journey  was  returning:  the  disastrous  ‘short 
cut’  through  the  Old  Forest;  the  ‘accident’  at  The  Prancing 
Pony. ;  and  his  madness  in  putting  on  the  Ring  in  the  dell 
under  Weathertop.  While  he  was  thinking  of  all  these  things 
and  trying  in  vain  to  bring  his  memory  down  to  his  arriving 
in  Rivendell,  there  was  a  long  silence,  broken  only  by  the  soft 
puffs  of  Gandalf ’s  pipe,  as  he  blew  white  smoke -rings  out  of 
the  window. 

‘Where’s  Sam?’  Frodo  asked  at  length.  ‘And  are  the  others 
all  right?’ 


286 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Yes,  they  are  all  safe  and  sound,’  answered  Gandalf.  ‘Sam 
was  here  until  I  sent  him  off  to  get  some  rest,  about  half  an 
hour  ago.’ 

‘What  happened  at  the  Ford?’  said  Frodo.  ‘It  all  seemed 
so  dim,  somehow;  and  it  still  does.’ 

‘Yes,  it  would.  You  were  beginning  to  fade,’  answered 
Gandalf.  ‘The  wound  was  overcoming  you  at  last.  A  few 
more  hours  and  you  would  have  been  beyond  our  aid.  But 
you  have  some  strength  in  you,  my  dear  hobbit!  As  you 
showed  in  the  Barrow.  That  was  touch  and  go:  perhaps  the 
most  dangerous  moment  of  all.  I  wish  you  could  have  held 
out  at  Weathertop.’ 

‘You  seem  to  know  a  great  deal  already,’  said  Frodo.  ‘I 
have  not  spoken  to  the  others  about  the  Barrow.  At  first  it 
was  too  horrible,  and  afterwards  there  were  other  things  to 
think  about.  How  do  you  know  about  it?’ 

‘You  have  talked  long  in  your  sleep,  Frodo,’  said  Gandalf 
gently,  ‘and  it  has  not  been  hard  for  me  to  read  your  mind 
and  memory.  Do  not  worry!  Though  I  said  “absurd”  just 
now,  I  did  not  mean  it.  I  think  well  of  you  -  and  of  the  others. 
It  is  no  small  feat  to  have  come  so  far,  and  through  such 
dangers,  still  bearing  the  Ring.’ 

‘We  should  never  have  done  it  without  Strider,’  said  Frodo. 
‘But  we  needed  you.  I  did  not  know  what  to  do  without  you.’ 

‘I  was  delayed,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘and  that  nearly  proved  our 
ruin.  And  yet  I  am  not  sure:  it  may  have  been  better  so.’ 

‘I  wish  you  would  tell  me  what  happened!’ 

‘All  in  good  time!  You  are  not  supposed  to  talk  or  worry 
about  anything  today,  by  Elrond’s  orders.’ 

‘But  talking  would  stop  me  thinking  and  wondering,  which 
are  quite  as  tiring,’  said  Frodo.  ‘I  am  wide  awake  now,  and  I 
remember  so  many  things  that  want  explaining.  Why  were 
you  delayed?  You  ought  to  tell  me  that  at  least.’ 

‘You  will  soon  hear  all  you  wish  to  know,’  said  Gandalf. 
We  shall  have  a  Council,  as  soon  as  you  are  well  enough.  At 
the  moment  I  will  only  say  that  I  was  held  captive.’ 

‘You?’  cried  Frodo. 


MANY  MEETINGS 


287 


‘Yes,  I,  Gandalf  the  Grey,’  said  the  wizard  solemnly. 
‘There  are  many  powers  in  the  world,  for  good  or  for  evil. 
Some  are  greater  than  I  am.  Against  some  I  have  not  yet  been 
measured.  But  my  time  is  coming.  The  Morgul-lord  and  his 
Black  Riders  have  come  forth.  War  is  preparing!’ 

‘Then  you  knew  of  the  Riders  already  -  before  I  met  them?’ 

‘Yes,  I  knew  of  them.  Indeed  I  spoke  of  them  once  to  you; 
for  the  Black  Riders  are  the  Ringwraiths,  the  Nine  Servants 
of  the  Lord  of  the  Rings.  But  I  did  not  know  that  they  had 
arisen  again  or  I  should  have  fled  with  you  at  once.  I  heard 
news  of  them  only  after  I  left  you  in  June;  but  that  story  must 
wait.  For  the  moment  we  have  been  saved  from  disaster,  by 
Aragorn.’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Frodo,  ‘it  was  Strider  that  saved  us.  Yet  I  was 
afraid  of  him  at  first.  Sam  never  quite  trusted  him,  I  think, 
not  at  any  rate  until  we  met  Glorfindel.’ 

Gandalf  smiled.  ‘I  have  heard  all  about  Sam,’  he  said.  ‘He 
has  no  more  doubts  now.’ 

‘I  am  glad,’  said  Frodo.  ‘For  I  have  become  very  fond  of 
Strider.  Well,  fond  is  not  the  right  word.  I  mean  he  is  dear  to 
me;  though  he  is  strange,  and  grim  at  times.  In  fact,  he 
reminds  me  often  of  you.  I  didn’t  know  that  any  of  the  Big 
People  were  like  that.  I  thought,  well,  that  they  were  just  big, 
and  rather  stupid:  kind  and  stupid  like  Butterbur;  or  stupid 
and  wicked  like  Bill  Ferny.  But  then  we  don’t  know  much 
about  Men  in  the  Shire,  except  perhaps  the  Bree-landers.’ 

‘You  don’t  know  much  even  about  them,  if  you  think  old 
Barliman  is  stupid,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘He  is  wise  enough  on  his 
own  ground.  He  thinks  less  than  he  talks,  and  slower;  yet  he 
can  see  through  a  brick  wall  in  time  (as  they  say  in  Bree). 
But  there  are  few  left  in  Middle-earth  like  Aragorn  son  of 
Arathorn.  The  race  of  the  Kings  from  over  the  Sea  is  nearly 
at  an  end.  It  may  be  that  this  War  of  the  Ring  will  be  their 
last  adventure.’ 

‘Do  you  really  mean  that  Strider  is  one  of  the  people  of 
the  old  Kings?’  said  Frodo  in  wonder.  ‘I  thought  they  had  all 
vanished  long  ago.  I  thought  he  was  only  a  Ranger.’ 


288 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Only  a  Ranger!’  cried  Gandalf.  ‘My  dear  Frodo,  that  is 
just  what  the  Rangers  are:  the  last  remnant  in  the  North  of 
the  great  people,  the  Men  of  the  West.  They  have  helped  me 
before;  and  I  shall  need  their  help  in  the  days  to  come;  for 
we  have  reached  Rivendell,  but  the  Ring  is  not  yet  at  rest.’ 

‘I  suppose  not,’  said  Frodo.  ‘But  so  far  my  only  thought 
has  been  to  get  here;  and  I  hope  I  shan’t  have  to  go  any 
further.  It  is  very  pleasant  just  to  rest.  I  have  had  a  month  of 
exile  and  adventure,  and  I  find  that  has  been  as  much  as  I 
want.  ’ 

He  fell  silent  and  shut  his  eyes.  After  a  while  he  spoke 
again.  ‘I  have  been  reckoning,’  he  said,  ‘and  I  can’t  bring 
the  total  up  to  October  the  twenty-fourth.  It  ought  to  be 
the  twenty-first.  We  must  have  reached  the  Ford  by  the 
twentieth.’ 

‘You  have  talked  and  reckoned  more  than  is  good  for  you,’ 
said  Gandalf.  ‘How  do  the  side  and  shoulder  feel  now?’ 

‘I  don’t  know,’  Frodo  answered.  ‘They  don’t  feel  at  all: 
which  is  an  improvement,  but’  -  he  made  an  effort  -  ‘I  can 
move  my  arm  again  a  little.  Yes,  it  is  coming  back  to  life.  It 
is  not  cold,’  he  added,  touching  his  left  hand  with  his  right. 

‘Good!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘It  is  mending  fast.  You  will  soon  be 
sound  again.  Elrond  has  cured  you:  he  has  tended  you  for 
days,  ever  since  you  were  brought  in.’ 

‘Days?’  said  Frodo. 

Well,  four  nights  and  three  days,  to  be  exact.  The  Elves 
brought  you  from  the  Ford  on  the  night  of  the  twentieth,  and 
that  is  where  you  lost  count.  We  have  been  terribly  anxious, 
and  Sam  has  hardly  left  your  side,  day  or  night,  except  to 
run  messages.  Elrond  is  a  master  of  healing,  but  the  weapons 
of  our  Enemy  are  deadly.  To  tell  you  the  truth,  I  had  very 
little  hope;  for  I  suspected  that  there  was  some  fragment  of 
the  blade  still  in  the  closed  wound.  But  it  could  not  be  found 
until  last  night.  Then  Elrond  removed  a  splinter.  It  was  deeply 
buried,  and  it  was  working  inwards.’ 

Frodo  shuddered,  remembering  the  cruel  knife  with 
notched  blade  that  had  vanished  in  Strider’s  hands.  ‘Don’t 


MANY  MEETINGS 


289 


be  alarmed!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘It  is  gone  now.  It  has  been  melted. 
And  it  seems  that  Hobbits  fade  very  reluctantly.  I  have  known 
strong  warriors  of  the  Big  People  who  would  quickly  have 
been  overcome  by  that  splinter,  which  you  bore  for  seventeen 
days.’ 

‘What  would  they  have  done  to  me?’  asked  Frodo.  ‘What 
were  the  Riders  trying  to  do?’ 

‘They  tried  to  pierce  your  heart  with  a  Morgul-knife  which 
remains  in  the  wound.  If  they  had  succeeded,  you  would 
have  become  like  they  are,  only  weaker  and  under  their  com¬ 
mand.  You  would  have  become  a  wraith  under  the  dominion 
of  the  Dark  Lord;  and  he  would  have  tormented  you  for 
trying  to  keep  his  Ring,  if  any  greater  torment  were  possible 
than  being  robbed  of  it  and  seeing  it  on  his  hand.’ 

‘Thank  goodness  I  did  not  realize  the  horrible  danger!’  said 
Frodo  faintly.  ‘I  was  mortally  afraid,  of  course;  but  if  I  had 
known  more,  I  should  not  have  dared  even  to  move.  It  is  a 
marvel  that  I  escaped!’ 

‘Yes,  fortune  or  fate  have  helped  you,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘not 
to  mention  courage.  For  your  heart  was  not  touched,  and 
only  your  shoulder  was  pierced;  and  that  was  because  you 
resisted  to  the  last.  But  it  was  a  terribly  narrow  shave,  so  to 
speak.  You  were  in  gravest  peril  while  you  wore  the  Ring,  for 
then  you  were  half  in  the  wraith-world  yourself,  and  they 
might  have  seized  you.  You  could  see  them,  and  they  could 
see  you.’ 

‘I  know,’  said  Frodo.  ‘They  were  terrible  to  behold!  But 
why  could  we  all  see  their  horses?’ 

‘Because  they  are  real  horses;  just  as  the  black  robes  are 
real  robes  that  they  wear  to  give  shape  to  their  nothingness 
when  they  have  dealings  with  the  living.’ 

‘Then  why  do  these  black  horses  endure  such  riders?  All 
other  animals  are  terrified  when  they  draw  near,  even  the 
elf-horse  of  Glorhndel.  The  dogs  howl  and  the  geese  scream 
at  them.’ 

‘Because  these  horses  are  born  and  bred  to  the  service  of 
the  Dark  Lord  in  Mordor.  Not  all  his  servants  and  chattels 


290  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

are  wraiths!  There  are  ores  and  trolls,  there  are  wargs  and 
werewolves;  and  there  have  been  and  still  are  many  Men, 
warriors  and  kings,  that  walk  alive  under  the  Sun,  and  yet  are 
under  his  sway.  And  their  number  is  growing  daily.’ 

‘What  about  Rivendell  and  the  Elves?  Is  Rivendell  safe?’ 

‘Yes,  at  present,  until  all  else  is  conquered.  The  Elves  may 
fear  the  Dark  Lord,  and  they  may  fly  before  him,  but  never 
again  will  they  listen  to  him  or  serve  him.  And  here  in  Riven¬ 
dell  there  live  still  some  of  his  chief  foes:  the  Elven-wise,  lords 
of  the  Eldar  from  beyond  the  furthest  seas.  They  do  not  fear 
the  Ringwraiths,  for  those  who  have  dwelt  in  the  Blessed 
Realm  live  at  once  in  both  worlds,  and  against  both  the  Seen 
and  the  Unseen  they  have  great  power.’ 

‘I  thought  that  I  saw  a  white  figure  that  shone  and  did  not 
grow  dim  like  the  others.  Was  that  Glorfindel  then?’ 

‘Yes,  you  saw  him  for  a  moment  as  he  is  upon  the  other 
side:  one  of  the  mighty  of  the  Firstborn.  He  is  an  Elf-lord  of 
a  house  of  princes.  Indeed  there  is  a  power  in  Rivendell  to 
withstand  the  might  of  Mordor,  for  a  while:  and  elsewhere 
other  powers  still  dwell.  There  is  power,  too,  of  another  kind 
in  the  Shire.  But  all  such  places  will  soon  become  islands 
under  siege,  if  things  go  on  as  they  are  going.  The  Dark  Lord 
is  putting  forth  all  his  strength. 

‘Still,’  he  said,  standing  suddenly  up  and  sticking  out  his 
chin,  while  his  beard  went  stiff  and  straight  like  bristling  wire, 
‘we  must  keep  up  our  courage.  You  will  soon  be  well,  if  I  do 
not  talk  you  to  death.  You  are  in  Rivendell,  and  you  need 
not  worry  about  anything  for  the  present.’ 

‘I  haven’t  any  courage  to  keep  up,’  said  Frodo,  ‘but  I  am 
not  worried  at  the  moment.  Just  give  me  news  of  my  friends, 
and  tell  me  the  end  of  the  affair  at  the  Ford,  as  I  keep  on 
asking,  and  I  shall  be  content  for  the  present.  After  that  I 
shall  have  another  sleep,  I  think;  but  I  shan’t  be  able  to  close 
my  eyes  until  you  have  finished  the  story  for  me.’ 

Gandalf  moved  his  chair  to  the  bedside  and  took  a  good 
look  at  Frodo.  The  colour  had  come  back  to  his  face,  and  his 
eyes  were  clear,  and  fully  awake  and  aware.  He  was  smiling, 


MANY  MEETINGS 


291 


and  there  seemed  to  be  little  wrong  with  him.  But  to  the 
wizard’s  eye  there  was  a  faint  change,  just  a  hint  as  it  were  of 
transparency,  about  him,  and  especially  about  the  left  hand 
that  lay  outside  upon  the  coverlet. 

‘Still  that  must  be  expected,’  said  Gandalf  to  himself.  ‘He 
is  not  half  through  yet,  and  to  what  he  will  come  in  the  end 
not  even  Elrond  can  foretell.  Not  to  evil,  I  think.  He  may 
become  like  a  glass  filled  with  a  clear  light  for  eyes  to  see  that 
can.’ 

‘You  look  splendid,’  he  said  aloud.  ‘I  will  risk  a  brief  tale 
without  consulting  Elrond.  But  quite  brief,  mind  you,  and 
then  you  must  sleep  again.  This  is  what  happened,  as  far  as 
I  can  gather.  The  Riders  made  straight  for  you,  as  soon  as 
you  fled.  They  did  not  need  the  guidance  of  their  horses  any 
longer:  you  had  become  visible  to  them,  being  already  on  the 
threshold  of  their  world.  And  also  the  Ring  drew  them.  Your 
friends  sprang  aside,  off  the  road,  or  they  would  have  been 
ridden  down.  They  knew  that  nothing  could  save  you,  if  the 
white  horse  could  not.  The  Riders  were  too  swift  to  over¬ 
take,  and  too  many  to  oppose.  On  foot  even  Glorfindel  and 
Aragorn  together  could  not  withstand  all  the  Nine  at  once. 

‘When  the  Ringwraiths  swept  by,  your  friends  ran  up 
behind.  Close  to  the  Ford  there  is  a  small  hollow  beside  the 
road  masked  by  a  few  stunted  trees.  There  they  hastily 
kindled  fire;  for  Glorfindel  knew  that  a  flood  would  come 
down,  if  the  Riders  tried  to  cross,  and  then  he  would  have  to 
deal  with  any  that  were  left  on  his  side  of  the  river.  The 
moment  the  flood  appeared,  he  rushed  out,  followed  by 
Aragorn  and  the  others  with  flaming  brands.  Caught  between 
fire  and  water,  and  seeing  an  Elf-lord  revealed  in  his  wrath, 
they  were  dismayed,  and  their  horses  were  stricken  with  mad¬ 
ness.  Three  were  carried  away  by  the  first  assault  of  the  flood; 
the  others  were  now  hurled  into  the  water  by  their  horses  and 
overwhelmed.’ 

‘And  is  that  the  end  of  the  Black  Riders?’  asked  Frodo. 

‘No,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘Their  horses  must  have  perished, 
and  without  them  they  are  crippled.  But  the  Ringwraiths 


292  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

themselves  cannot  be  so  easily  destroyed.  However,  there  is 
nothing  more  to  fear  from  them  at  present.  Your  friends 
crossed  after  the  flood  had  passed  and  they  found  you  lying 
on  your  face  at  the  top  of  the  bank,  with  a  broken  sword 
under  you.  The  horse  was  standing  guard  beside  you.  You 
were  pale  and  cold,  and  they  feared  that  you  were  dead,  or 
worse.  Elrond’s  folk  met  them,  carrying  you  slowly  towards 
Rivendell.’ 

‘Who  made  the  flood?’  asked  Frodo. 

‘Elrond  commanded  it,’  answered  Gandalf.  ‘The  river  of 
this  valley  is  under  his  power,  and  it  will  rise  in  anger  when 
he  has  great  need  to  bar  the  Ford.  As  soon  as  the  captain  of 
the  Ringwraiths  rode  into  the  water  the  flood  was  released. 
If  I  may  say  so,  I  added  a  few  touches  of  my  own:  you  may 
not  have  noticed,  but  some  of  the  waves  took  the  form  of 
great  white  horses  with  shining  white  riders;  and  there  were 
many  rolling  and  grinding  boulders.  For  a  moment  I  was 
afraid  that  we  had  let  loose  too  fierce  a  wrath,  and  the  flood 
would  get  out  of  hand  and  wash  you  all  away.  There  is  great 
vigour  in  the  waters  that  come  down  from  the  snows  of  the 
Misty  Mountains.’ 

‘Yes,  it  all  comes  back  to  me  now,’  said  Frodo:  ‘the  tremen¬ 
dous  roaring.  I  thought  I  was  drowning,  with  my  friends  and 
enemies  and  all.  But  now  we  are  safe!’ 

Gandalf  looked  quickly  at  Frodo,  but  he  had  shut  his  eyes. 
‘Yes,  you  are  all  safe  for  the  present.  Soon  there  will  be 
feasting  and  merrymaking  to  celebrate  the  victory  at  the  Ford 
of  Bruinen,  and  you  will  all  be  there  in  places  of  honour.’ 

‘Splendid!’  said  Frodo.  ‘It  is  wonderful  that  Elrond,  and 
Glorfindel  and  such  great  lords,  not  to  mention  Strider, 
should  take  so  much  trouble  and  show  me  so  much  kindness.’ 

‘Well,  there  are  many  reasons  why  they  should,’  said 
Gandalf,  smiling.  ‘I  am  one  good  reason.  The  Ring  is  another: 
you  are  the  Ring-bearer.  And  you  are  the  heir  of  Bilbo,  the 
Ring-finder.’ 

‘Dear  Bilbo!’  said  Frodo  sleepily.  ‘I  wonder  where  he  is.  I 
wish  he  was  here  and  could  hear  all  about  it.  It  would  have 


MANY  MEETINGS  293 

made  him  laugh.  The  cow  jumped  over  the  Moon!  And  the 
poor  old  troll!’  With  that  he  fell  fast  asleep. 

Frodo  was  now  safe  in  the  Last  Homely  House  east  of  the 
Sea.  That  house  was,  as  Bilbo  had  long  ago  reported,  ‘a 
perfect  house,  whether  you  like  food  or  sleep  or  story-telling 
or  singing,  or  just  sitting  and  thinking  best,  or  a  pleasant 
mixture  of  them  all’.  Merely  to  be  there  was  a  cure  for  weari¬ 
ness,  fear,  and  sadness. 

As  the  evening  drew  on,  Frodo  woke  up  again,  and  he 
found  that  he  no  longer  felt  in  need  of  rest  or  sleep,  but  had 
a  mind  for  food  and  drink,  and  probably  for  singing  and 
story-telling  afterwards.  He  got  out  of  bed  and  discovered 
that  his  arm  was  already  nearly  as  useful  again  as  it  ever  had 
been.  He  found  laid  ready  clean  garments  of  green  cloth  that 
fitted  him  excellently.  Looking  in  a  mirror  he  was  startled  to 
see  a  much  thinner  reflection  of  himself  than  he  remembered: 
it  looked  remarkably  like  the  young  nephew  of  Bilbo  who 
used  to  go  tramping  with  his  uncle  in  the  Shire;  but  the  eyes 
looked  out  at  him  thoughtfully. 

‘Yes,  you  have  seen  a  thing  or  two  since  you  last  peeped 
out  of  a  looking-glass,’  he  said  to  his  reflection.  ‘But  now  for 
a  merry  meeting!’  He  stretched  out  his  arms  and  whistled  a 
tune. 

At  that  moment  there  was  a  knock  on  the  door,  and  Sam 
came  in.  He  ran  to  Frodo  and  took  his  left  hand,  awkwardly 
and  shyly.  He  stroked  it  gently  and  then  he  blushed  and 
turned  hastily  away. 

‘Hullo,  Sam!’  said  Frodo. 

‘It’s  warm!’  said  Sam.  ‘Meaning  your  hand,  Mr.  Frodo.  It 
has  felt  so  cold  through  the  long  nights.  But  glory  and  trum¬ 
pets!’  he  cried,  turning  round  again  with  shining  eyes  and 
dancing  on  the  floor.  ‘It’s  fine  to  see  you  up  and  yourself 
again,  sir!  Gandalf  asked  me  to  come  and  see  if  you  were 
ready  to  come  down,  and  I  thought  he  was  joking.’ 

‘I  am  ready,’  said  Frodo.  ‘Let’s  go  and  look  for  the  rest  of 
the  party!’ 


294 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘I  can  take  you  to  them,  sir,’  said  Sam.  ‘It’s  a  big  house 
this,  and  very  peculiar.  Always  a  bit  more  to  discover,  and 
no  knowing  what  you’ll  find  round  a  corner.  And  Elves,  sir! 
Elves  here,  and  Elves  there!  Some  like  lungs,  terrible  and 
splendid;  and  some  as  merry  as  children.  And  the  music  and 
the  singing  -  not  that  I  have  had  the  time  or  the  heart  for 
much  listening  since  we  got  here.  But  I’m  getting  to  know 
some  of  the  ways  of  the  place.’ 

‘I  know  what  you  have  been  doing,  Sam,’  said  Frodo, 
taking  his  arm.  ‘But  you  shall  be  merry  tonight,  and  listen  to 
your  heart’s  content.  Come  on,  guide  me  round  the  corners!’ 

Sam  led  him  along  several  passages  and  down  many  steps 
and  out  into  a  high  garden  above  the  steep  bank  of  the  river. 
He  found  his  friends  sitting  in  a  porch  on  the  side  of  the 
house  looking  east.  Shadows  had  fallen  in  the  valley  below, 
but  there  was  still  a  light  on  the  faces  of  the  mountains  far 
above.  The  air  was  warm.  The  sound  of  running  and  falling 
water  was  loud,  and  the  evening  was  filled  with  a  faint  scent 
of  trees  and  flowers,  as  if  summer  still  lingered  in  Elrond’s 
gardens. 

‘Hurray!’  cried  Pippin,  springing  up.  ‘Here  is  our  noble 
cousin!  Make  way  for  Frodo,  Lord  of  the  Ring!’ 

‘Hush!’  said  Gandalf  from  the  shadows  at  the  back  of  the 
porch.  ‘Evil  things  do  not  come  into  this  valley;  but  all  the 
same  we  should  not  name  them.  The  Lord  of  the  Ring  is  not 
Frodo,  but  the  master  of  the  Dark  Tower  of  Mordor,  whose 
power  is  again  stretching  out  over  the  world.  We  are  sitting 
in  a  fortress.  Outside  it  is  getting  dark.’ 

‘Gandalf  has  been  saying  many  cheerful  things  like  that,’ 
said  Pippin.  ‘He  thinks  I  need  keeping  in  order.  But  it  seems 
impossible,  somehow,  to  feel  gloomy  or  depressed  in  this 
place.  I  feel  I  could  sing,  if  I  knew  the  right  song  for  the 
occasion.’ 

‘I  feel  like  singing  myself,’  laughed  Frodo.  ‘Though  at  the 
moment  I  feel  more  like  eating  and  drinking.’ 

‘That  will  soon  be  cured,’  said  Pippin.  ‘You  have  shown 
your  usual  cunning  in  getting  up  just  in  time  for  a  meal.’ 


MANY  MEETINGS 


295 


‘More  than  a  meal!  A  feast!’  said  Merry.  ‘As  soon  as 
Gandalf  reported  that  you  were  recovered,  the  preparations 
began.’  He  had  hardly  finished  speaking  when  they  were 
summoned  to  the  hall  by  the  ringing  of  many  bells. 

The  hall  of  Elrond’s  house  was  filled  with  folk:  Elves  for 
the  most  part,  though  there  were  a  few  guests  of  other  sorts. 
Elrond,  as  was  his  custom,  sat  in  a  great  chair  at  the  end  of 
the  long  table  upon  the  dais;  and  next  to  him  on  the  one  side 
sat  Glorfindel,  on  the  other  side  sat  Gandalf. 

Frodo  looked  at  them  in  wonder;  for  he  had  never  before 
seen  Elrond,  of  whom  so  many  tales  spoke;  and  as  they 
sat  upon  his  right  hand  and  his  left,  Glorfindel,  and  even 
Gandalf,  whom  he  thought  he  knew  so  well,  were  revealed 
as  lords  of  dignity  and  power. 

Gandalf  was  shorter  in  stature  than  the  other  two;  but  his 
long  white  hair,  his  sweeping  silver  beard,  and  his  broad 
shoulders,  made  him  look  like  some  wise  king  of  ancient 
legend.  In  his  aged  face  under  great  snowy  brows  his  dark 
eyes  were  set  like  coals  that  could  leap  suddenly  into  fire. 

Glorfindel  was  tall  and  straight;  his  hair  was  of  shining 
gold,  his  face  fair  and  young  and  fearless  and  full  of  joy;  his 
eyes  were  bright  and  keen,  and  his  voice  like  music;  on  his 
brow  sat  wisdom,  and  in  his  hand  was  strength. 

The  face  of  Elrond  was  ageless,  neither  old  nor  young, 
though  in  it  was  written  the  memory  of  many  things  both 
glad  and  sorrowful.  His  hair  was  dark  as  the  shadows  of 
twilight,  and  upon  it  was  set  a  circlet  of  silver;  his  eyes  were 
grey  as  a  clear  evening,  and  in  them  was  a  light  like  the  light 
of  stars.  Venerable  he  seemed  as  a  king  crowned  with  many 
winters,  and  yet  hale  as  a  tried  warrior  in  the  fulness  of  his 
strength.  He  was  the  Lord  of  Rivendell  and  mighty  among 
both  Elves  and  Men. 

In  the  middle  of  the  table,  against  the  woven  cloths  upon 
the  wall,  there  was  a  chair  under  a  canopy,  and  there  sat  a 
lady  fair  to  look  upon,  and  so  like  was  she  in  form  of  woman¬ 
hood  to  Elrond  that  Frodo  guessed  that  she  was  one  of  his 


296  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

close  kindred.  Young  she  was  and  yet  not  so.  The  braids  of 
her  dark  hair  were  touched  by  no  frost;  her  white  arms  and 
clear  face  were  flawless  and  smooth,  and  the  light  of  stars 
was  in  her  bright  eyes,  grey  as  a  cloudless  night;  yet  queenly 
she  looked,  and  thought  and  knowledge  were  in  her  glance, 
as  of  one  who  has  known  many  things  that  the  years  bring. 
Above  her  brow  her  head  was  covered  with  a  cap  of  silver 
lace  netted  with  small  gems,  glittering  white;  but  her  soft  grey 
raiment  had  no  ornament  save  a  girdle  of  leaves  wrought  in 
silver. 

So  it  was  that  Frodo  saw  her  whom  few  mortals  had  yet 
seen;  Arwen,  daughter  of  Elrond,  in  whom  it  was  said  that 
the  likeness  of  Luthien  had  come  on  earth  again;  and  she  was 
called  Undomiel,  for  she  was  the  Evenstar  of  her  people. 
Long  she  had  been  in  the  land  of  her  mother’s  kin,  in  Lorien 
beyond  the  mountains,  and  was  but  lately  returned  to  Riven- 
dell  to  her  father’s  house.  But  her  brothers,  Elladan  and 
Elrohir,  were  out  upon  errantry;  for  they  rode  often  far  afield 
with  the  Rangers  of  the  North,  forgetting  never  their  mother’s 
torment  in  the  dens  of  the  ores. 

Such  loveliness  in  living  thing  Frodo  had  never  seen  before 
nor  imagined  in  his  mind;  and  he  was  both  surprised  and 
abashed  to  find  that  he  had  a  seat  at  Elrond’ s  table  among  all 
these  folk  so  high  and  fair.  Though  he  had  a  suitable  chair, 
and  was  raised  upon  several  cushions,  he  felt  very  small,  and 
rather  out  of  place;  but  that  feeling  quickly  passed.  The  feast 
was  merry  and  the  food  all  that  his  hunger  could  desire.  It 
was  some  time  before  he  looked  about  him  again  or  even 
turned  to  his  neighbours. 

He  looked  first  for  his  friends.  Sam  had  begged  to  be 
allowed  to  wait  on  his  master,  but  had  been  told  that  for  this 
time  he  was  a  guest  of  honour.  Frodo  could  see  him  now, 
sitting  with  Pippin  and  Merry  at  the  upper  end  of  one  of 
the  side-tables  close  to  the  dais.  He  could  see  no  sign  of 
Strider. 

Next  to  Frodo  on  his  right  sat  a  dwarf  of  important  appear¬ 
ance,  richly  dressed.  His  beard,  very  long  and  forked,  was 


MANY  MEETINGS 


297 


white,  nearly  as  white  as  the  snow-white  cloth  of  his  garments. 
He  wore  a  silver  belt,  and  round  his  neck  hung  a  chain  of 
silver  and  diamonds.  Frodo  stopped  eating  to  look  at  him. 

‘Welcome  and  well  met!’  said  the  dwarf,  turning  towards 
him.  Then  he  actually  rose  from  his  seat  and  bowed.  ‘Gloin 
at  your  service,’  he  said,  and  bowed  still  lower. 

‘Frodo  Baggins  at  your  service  and  your  family’s,’  said 
Frodo  correctly,  rising  in  surprise  and  scattering  his  cushions. 
‘Am  I  right  in  guessing  that  you  are  the  Gloin,  one  of  the 
twelve  companions  of  the  great  Thorin  Oakenshield?’ 

‘Quite  right,’  answered  the  dwarf,  gathering  up  the 
cushions  and  courteously  assisting  Frodo  back  into  his  seat. 
‘And  I  do  not  ask,  for  I  have  already  been  told  that  you 
are  the  kinsman  and  adopted  heir  of  our  friend  Bilbo  the 
renowned.  Allow  me  to  congratulate  you  on  your  recovery.’ 

‘Thank  you  very  much,’  said  Frodo. 

‘You  have  had  some  very  strange  adventures,  I  hear,’  said 
Gloin.  ‘I  wonder  greatly  what  brings  four  hobbits  on  so  long 
a  journey.  Nothing  like  it  has  happened  since  Bilbo  came 
with  us.  But  perhaps  I  should  not  inquire  too  closely,  since 
Elrond  and  Gandalf  do  not  seem  disposed  to  talk  of  this?’ 

‘I  think  we  will  not  speak  of  it,  at  least  not  yet,’  said  Frodo 
politely.  He  guessed  that  even  in  Elrond’s  house  the  matter 
of  the  Ring  was  not  one  for  casual  talk;  and  in  any  case  he 
wished  to  forget  his  troubles  for  a  time.  ‘But  I  am  equally 
curious,’  he  added,  ‘to  learn  what  brings  so  important  a  dwarf 
so  far  from  the  Lonely  Mountain.’ 

Gloin  looked  at  him.  ‘If  you  have  not  heard,  I  think  we  will 
not  speak  yet  of  that  either.  Master  Elrond  will  summon  us 
all  ere  long,  I  believe,  and  then  we  shall  all  hear  many  things. 
But  there  is  much  else  that  may  be  told.’ 

Throughout  the  rest  of  the  meal  they  talked  together,  but 
Frodo  listened  more  than  he  spoke;  for  the  news  of  the  Shire, 
apart  from  the  Ring,  seemed  small  and  far-away  and  unim¬ 
portant,  while  Gloin  had  much  to  tell  of  events  in  the  northern 
regions  of  Wilderland.  Frodo  learned  that  Grimbeorn  the 
Old,  son  of  Beorn,  was  now  the  lord  of  many  sturdy  men, 


298  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

and  to  their  land  between  the  Mountains  and  Mirkwood 
neither  ore  nor  wolf  dared  to  go. 

‘Indeed,’  said  Gloin,  ‘if  it  were  not  for  the  Beornings,  the 
passage  from  Dale  to  Rivendell  would  long  ago  have  become 
impossible.  They  are  valiant  men  and  keep  open  the  High 
Pass  and  the  Ford  of  Carrock.  But  their  tolls  are  high,’  he 
added  with  a  shake  of  his  head;  ‘and  like  Beorn  of  old  they 
are  not  over  fond  of  dwarves.  Still,  they  are  trusty,  and  that 
is  much  in  these  days.  Nowhere  are  there  any  men  so  friendly 
to  us  as  the  Men  of  Dale.  They  are  good  folic,  the  Bardings. 
The  grandson  of  Bard  the  Bowman  rules  them,  Brand  son 
of  Bain  son  of  Bard.  He  is  a  strong  king,  and  his  realm  now 
reaches  far  south  and  east  of  Esgaroth.’ 

‘And  what  of  your  own  people?’  asked  Frodo. 

‘There  is  much  to  tell,  good  and  bad,’  said  Gloin;  ‘yet  it  is 
mostly  good:  we  have  so  far  been  fortunate,  though  we  do 
not  escape  the  shadow  of  these  times.  If  you  really  wish  to 
hear  of  us,  I  will  tell  you  tidings  gladly.  But  stop  me  when 
you  are  weary!  Dwarves’  tongues  run  on  when  speaking  of 
their  handiwork,  they  say.’ 

And  with  that  Gloin  embarked  on  a  long  account  of  the 
doings  of  the  Dwarf-kingdom.  He  was  delighted  to  have 
found  so  polite  a  listener;  for  Frodo  showed  no  sign  of  weari¬ 
ness  and  made  no  attempt  to  change  the  subject,  though 
actually  he  soon  got  rather  lost  among  the  strange  names  of 
people  and  places  that  he  had  never  heard  of  before.  He  was 
interested,  however,  to  hear  that  Dain  was  still  King  under 
the  Mountain,  and  was  now  old  (having  passed  his  two 
hundred  and  fiftieth  year),  venerable,  and  fabulously  rich.  Of 
the  ten  companions  who  had  survived  the  Battle  of  Five 
Armies  seven  were  still  with  him:  Dwalin,  Gloin,  Dori,  Nori, 
Bifur,  Bofur,  and  Bombur.  Bombur  was  now  so  fat  that  he 
could  not  move  himself  from  his  couch  to  his  chair  at  table, 
and  it  took  six  young  dwarves  to  lift  him. 

‘And  what  has  become  of  Balin  and  Ori  and  Oin?’  asked 
Frodo. 

A  shadow  passed  over  Gloin’s  face.  ‘We  do  not  know,’  he 


MANY  MEETINGS 


299 


answered.  ‘It  is  largely  on  account  of  Balin  that  I  have  come 
to  ask  the  advice  of  those  that  dwell  in  Rivendell.  But  tonight 
let  us  speak  of  merrier  things!’ 

Gloin  began  then  to  talk  of  the  works  of  his  people,  telling 
Frodo  about  their  great  labours  in  Dale  and  under  the  Moun¬ 
tain.  ‘We  have  done  well,’  he  said.  ‘But  in  metal-work  we 
cannot  rival  our  fathers,  many  of  whose  secrets  are  lost.  We 
make  good  armour  and  keen  swords,  but  we  cannot  again 
make  mail  or  blade  to  match  those  that  were  made  before  the 
dragon  came.  Only  in  mining  and  building  have  we  surpassed 
the  old  days.  You  should  see  the  waterways  of  Dale,  Frodo, 
and  the  fountains,  and  the  pools!  You  should  see  the  stone- 
paved  roads  of  many  colours!  And  the  halls  and  cavernous 
streets  under  the  earth  with  arches  carved  like  trees;  and  the 
terraces  and  towers  upon  the  Mountain’s  sides!  Then  you 
would  see  that  we  have  not  been  idle.’ 

‘I  will  come  and  see  them,  if  ever  I  can,’  said  Frodo.  ‘How 
surprised  Bilbo  would  have  been  to  see  all  the  changes  in  the 
Desolation  of  Smaug!’ 

Gloin  looked  at  Frodo  and  smiled.  ‘You  were  very  fond  of 
Bilbo  were  you  not?’  he  asked. 

‘Yes,’  answered  Frodo.  ‘I  would  rather  see  him  than  all  the 
towers  and  palaces  in  the  world.’ 

At  length  the  feast  came  to  an  end.  Elrond  and  Arwen  rose 
and  went  down  the  hall,  and  the  company  followed  them 
in  due  order.  The  doors  were  thrown  open,  and  they  went 
across  a  wide  passage  and  through  other  doors,  and  came 
into  a  further  hall.  In  it  were  no  tables,  but  a  bright  fire  was 
burning  in  a  great  hearth  between  the  carven  pillars  upon 
either  side. 

Frodo  found  himself  walking  with  Gandalf.  ‘This  is  the 
Hall  of  Fire,’  said  the  wizard.  ‘Here  you  will  hear  many  songs 
and  tales  -  if  you  can  keep  awake.  But  except  on  high  days 
it  usually  stands  empty  and  quiet,  and  people  come  here  who 
wish  for  peace,  and  thought.  There  is  always  a  fire  here,  all 
the  year  round,  but  there  is  little  other  light.’ 


300  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

As  Elrond  entered  and  went  towards  the  seat  prepared  for 
him,  Elvish  minstrels  began  to  make  sweet  music.  Slowly  the 
hall  filled,  and  Frodo  looked  with  delight  upon  the  many  fair 
faces  that  were  gathered  together;  the  golden  firelight  played 
upon  them  and  shimmered  in  their  hair.  Suddenly  he  noticed, 
not  far  from  the  further  end  of  the  fire,  a  small  dark  figure 
seated  on  a  stool  with  his  back  propped  against  a  pillar.  Beside 
him  on  the  ground  was  a  drinking-cup  and  some  bread. 
Frodo  wondered  whether  he  was  ill  (if  people  were  ever  ill  in 
Rivendell),  and  had  been  unable  to  come  to  the  feast.  His 
head  seemed  sunk  in  sleep  on  his  breast,  and  a  fold  of  his 
dark  cloak  was  drawn  over  his  face. 

Elrond  went  forward  and  stood  beside  the  silent  figure. 
‘Awake,  little  master!’  he  said,  with  a  smile.  Then,  turning  to 
Frodo,  he  beckoned  to  him.  ‘Now  at  last  the  hour  has  come 
that  you  have  wished  for,  Frodo,’  he  said.  ‘Here  is  a  friend 
that  you  have  long  missed.’ 

The  dark  figure  raised  its  head  and  uncovered  its  face. 

‘Bilbo!’  cried  Frodo  with  sudden  recognition,  and  he 
sprang  forward. 

‘Hullo,  Frodo  my  lad!’  said  Bilbo.  ‘So  you  have  got  here  at 
last.  I  hoped  you  would  manage  it.  Well,  well!  So  all  this 
feasting  is  in  your  honour,  I  hear.  I  hope  you  enjoyed 
yourself?’ 

‘Why  weren’t  you  there?’  cried  Frodo.  ‘And  why  haven’t 
I  been  allowed  to  see  you  before?’ 

‘Because  you  were  asleep.  I  have  seen  a  good  deal  of  you. 
I  have  sat  by  your  side  with  Sam  each  day.  But  as  for  the 
feast,  I  don’t  go  in  for  such  things  much  now.  And  I  had 
something  else  to  do.’ 

‘What  were  you  doing?’ 

‘Why,  sitting  and  thinking.  I  do  a  lot  of  that  nowadays,  and 
this  is  the  best  place  to  do  it  in,  as  a  rule.  Wake  up,  indeed!’ 
he  said,  cocking  an  eye  at  Elrond.  There  was  a  bright  twinkle 
in  it  and  no  sign  of  sleepiness  that  Frodo  could  see.  ‘Wake 
up!  I  was  not  asleep,  Master  Elrond.  If  you  want  to  know, 
you  have  all  come  out  from  your  feast  too  soon,  and  you 


MANY  MEETINGS 


301 


have  disturbed  me  -  in  the  middle  of  making  up  a  song.  I 
was  stuck  over  a  line  or  two,  and  was  thinking  about  them; 
but  now  I  don’t  suppose  I  shall  ever  get  them  right.  There 
will  be  such  a  deal  of  singing  that  the  ideas  will  be  driven  clean 
out  of  my  head.  I  shall  have  to  get  my  friend  the  Dunadan  to 
help  me.  Where  is  he?’ 

Elrond  laughed.  ‘He  shall  be  found,’  he  said.  ‘Then  you 
two  shall  go  into  a  corner  and  finish  your  task,  and  we  will 
hear  it  and  judge  it  before  we  end  our  merrymaking.’  Messen¬ 
gers  were  sent  to  find  Bilbo’s  friend,  though  none  knew  where 
he  was,  or  why  he  had  not  been  present  at  the  feast. 

In  the  meanwhile  Frodo  and  Bilbo  sat  side  by  side,  and 
Sam  came  quickly  and  placed  himself  near  them.  They  talked 
together  in  soft  voices,  oblivious  of  the  mirth  and  music  in 
the  hall  about  them.  Bilbo  had  not  much  to  say  of  himself. 
When  he  had  left  Hobbiton  he  had  wandered  off  aimlessly, 
along  the  Road  or  in  the  country  on  either  side;  but  somehow 
he  had  steered  all  the  time  towards  Rivendell. 

‘I  got  here  without  much  adventure,’  he  said,  ‘and  after  a 
rest  I  went  on  with  the  dwarves  to  Dale:  my  last  journey.  I 
shan’t  travel  again.  Old  Balin  had  gone  away.  Then  I  came 
back  here,  and  here  I  have  been.  I  have  done  this  and  that. 
I  have  written  some  more  of  my  book.  And,  of  course,  I  make 
up  a  few  songs.  They  sing  them  occasionally:  just  to  please 
me,  I  think;  for,  of  course,  they  aren’t  really  good  enough  for 
Rivendell.  And  I  listen  and  I  think.  Time  doesn’t  seem  to 
pass  here:  it  just  is.  A  remarkable  place  altogether. 

‘I  hear  all  lands  of  news,  from  over  the  Mountains,  and 
out  of  the  South,  but  hardly  anything  from  the  Shire.  I  heard 
about  the  Ring,  of  course.  Gandalf  has  been  here  often.  Not 
that  he  has  told  me  a  great  deal,  he  has  become  closer  than 
ever  these  last  few  years.  The  Dunadan  has  told  me  more. 
Fancy  that  ring  of  mine  causing  such  a  disturbance!  It  is  a 
pity  that  Gandalf  did  not  find  out  more  sooner.  I  could  have 
brought  the  thing  here  myself  long  ago  without  so  much 
trouble.  I  have  thought  several  times  of  going  back  to  Hobbi¬ 
ton  for  it;  but  I  am  getting  old,  and  they  would  not  let  me: 


302 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Gandalf  and  Elrond,  I  mean.  They  seemed  to  think  that  the 
Enemy  was  looking  high  and  low  for  me,  and  would  make 
mincemeat  of  me,  if  he  caught  me  tottering  about  in  the 
Wild. 

‘And  Gandalf  said:  “The  Ring  has  passed  on,  Bilbo.  It 
would  do  no  good  to  you  or  to  others,  if  you  tried  to  meddle 
with  it  again.”  Odd  sort  of  remark,  just  like  Gandalf.  But  he 
said  he  was  looking  after  you,  so  I  let  things  be.  I  am  fright¬ 
fully  glad  to  see  you  safe  and  sound.’  He  paused  and  looked 
at  Frodo  doubtfully. 

‘Have  you  got  it  here?’  he  asked  in  a  whisper.  ‘I  can’t  help 
feeling  curious,  you  know,  after  all  I’ve  heard.  I  should  very 
much  like  just  to  peep  at  it  again.’ 

‘Yes,  I’ve  got  it,’  answered  Frodo,  feeling  a  strange  reluc¬ 
tance.  ‘It  looks  just  the  same  as  ever  it  did.’ 

‘Well,  I  should  just  like  to  see  it  for  a  moment,’  said  Bilbo. 

When  he  had  dressed,  Frodo  found  that  while  he  slept  the 
Ring  had  been  hung  about  his  neck  on  a  new  chain,  light  but 
strong.  Slowly  he  drew  it  out.  Bilbo  put  out  his  hand.  But 
Frodo  quickly  drew  back  the  Ring.  To  his  distress  and  amaze¬ 
ment  he  found  that  he  was  no  longer  looking  at  Bilbo;  a 
shadow  seemed  to  have  fallen  between  them,  and  through 
it  he  found  himself  eyeing  a  little  wrinkled  creature  with  a 
hungry  face  and  bony  groping  hands.  He  felt  a  desire  to  strike 
him. 

The  music  and  singing  round  them  seemed  to  falter,  and 
a  silence  fell.  Bilbo  looked  quickly  at  Frodo’s  face  and  passed 
his  hand  across  his  eyes.  ‘I  understand  now,’  he  said.  ‘Put  it 
away!  I  am  sorry:  sorry  you  have  come  in  for  this  burden; 
sorry  about  everything.  Don’t  adventures  ever  have  an  end? 
I  suppose  not.  Someone  else  always  has  to  carry  on  the  story. 
Well,  it  can’t  be  helped.  I  wonder  if  it’s  any  good  trying  to 
finish  my  book?  But  don’t  let’s  worry  about  it  now  -  let’s 
have  some  real  News!  Tell  me  all  about  the  Shire!’ 

Frodo  hid  the  Ring  away,  and  the  shadow  passed  leaving 
hardly  a  shred  of  memory.  The  light  and  music  of  Rivendell 


MANY  MEETINGS 


303 


was  about  him  again.  Bilbo  smiled  and  laughed  happily. 
Every  item  of  news  from  the  Shire  that  Frodo  could  tell  - 
aided  and  corrected  now  and  again  by  Sam  -  was  of  the 
greatest  interest  to  him,  from  the  felling  of  the  least  tree  to 
the  pranks  of  the  smallest  child  in  Hobbiton.  They  were  so 
deep  in  the  doings  of  the  Four  Farthings  that  they  did  not 
notice  the  arrival  of  a  man  clad  in  dark  green  cloth.  For  many 
minutes  he  stood  looking  down  at  them  with  a  smile. 

Suddenly  Bilbo  looked  up.  ‘Ah,  there  you  are  at  last,  Dun- 
adan!’  he  cried. 

‘Strider!’  said  Frodo.  ‘You  seem  to  have  a  lot  of  names.’ 

‘Well,  Strider  is  one  that  I  haven’t  heard  before,  anyway,’ 
said  Bilbo.  ‘What  do  you  call  him  that  for?’ 

‘They  call  me  that  in  Bree,’  said  Strider  laughing,  ‘and  that 
is  how  I  was  introduced  to  him.’ 

‘And  why  do  you  call  him  Dunadan?’  asked  Frodo. 

‘  The  Dunadan,’  said  Bilbo.  ‘Fie  is  often  called  that  here. 
But  I  thought  you  knew  enough  Elvish  at  least  to  know  dun¬ 
adan:  Man  of  the  West,  Numenorean.  But  this  is  not  the  time 
for  lessons!’  He  turned  to  Strider.  Where  have  you  been,  my 
friend?  Why  weren’t  you  at  the  feast?  The  Lady  Arwen  was 
there.’ 

Strider  looked  down  at  Bilbo  gravely.  ‘I  know,’  he  said. 
‘But  often  I  must  put  mirth  aside.  Elladan  and  Elrohir  have 
returned  out  of  the  Wild  unlooked-for,  and  they  had  tidings 
that  I  wished  to  hear  at  once.’ 

Well,  my  dear  fellow,’  said  Bilbo,  ‘now  you’ve  heard  the 
news,  can’t  you  spare  me  a  moment?  I  want  your  help  in 
something  urgent.  Elrond  says  this  song  of  mine  is  to  be 
finished  before  the  end  of  the  evening,  and  I  am  stuck.  Let’s 
go  off  into  a  corner  and  polish  it  up!’ 

Strider  smiled.  ‘Come  then!’  he  said.  ‘Let  me  hear  it!’ 

Frodo  was  left  to  himself  for  a  while,  for  Sam  had  fallen 
asleep.  He  was  alone  and  felt  rather  forlorn,  although  all 
about  him  the  folk  of  Rivendell  were  gathered.  But  those  near 
him  were  silent,  intent  upon  the  music  of  the  voices  and  the 


304  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

instruments,  and  they  gave  no  heed  to  anything  else.  Frodo 
began  to  listen. 

At  first  the  beauty  of  the  melodies  and  of  the  interwoven 
words  in  elven-tongues,  even  though  he  understood  them 
little,  held  him  in  a  spell,  as  soon  as  he  began  to  attend  to 
them.  Almost  it  seemed  that  the  words  took  shape,  and 
visions  of  far  lands  and  bright  things  that  he  had  never  yet 
imagined  opened  out  before  him;  and  the  firelit  hall  became 
like  a  golden  mist  above  seas  of  foam  that  sighed  upon  the 
margins  of  the  world.  Then  the  enchantment  became  more 
and  more  dreamlike,  until  he  felt  that  an  endless  river  of 
swelling  gold  and  silver  was  flowing  over  him,  too  multitu¬ 
dinous  for  its  pattern  to  be  comprehended;  it  became  part  of 
the  throbbing  air  about  him,  and  it  drenched  and  drowned 
him.  Swiftly  he  sank  under  its  shining  weight  into  a  deep 
realm  of  sleep. 

There  he  wandered  long  in  a  dream  of  music  that  turned 
into  running  water,  and  then  suddenly  into  a  voice.  It  seemed 
to  be  the  voice  of  Bilbo  chanting  verses.  Faint  at  first  and 
then  clearer  ran  the  words. 

Earendil  was  a  mariner 
that  tarried  in  Arvernien; 
he  built  a  boat  of  timber  felled 
in  Nimbrethil  to  journey  in; 
her  sails  he  wove  of  silver  fair, 
of  silver  were  her  lanterns  made, 
her  prow  he  fashioned  like  a  swan, 
and  light  upon  her  banners  laid. 

In  panoply  of  ancient  kings, 
in  chained  rings  he  armoured  him; 
his  shining  shield  was  scored  with  runes 
to  ward  all  wounds  and  harm  from  him; 
his  bow  was  made  of  dragon-horn, 
his  arrows  shorn  of  ebony, 
of  silver  was  his  habergeon, 


MANY  MEETINGS 


305 


his  scabbard  of  chalcedony; 
his  sword  of  steel  was  valiant, 
of  adamant  his  helmet  tall, 
an  eagle-plume  upon  his  crest, 
upon  his  breast  an  emerald. 

Beneath  the  Moon  and  under  star 
he  wandered  far  from  northern  strands, 
bewildered  on  enchanted  ways 
beyond  the  days  of  mortal  lands. 

From  gnashing  of  the  Narrow  Ice 
where  shadow  lies  on  frozen  hills, 
from  nether  heats  and  burning  waste 
he  turned  in  haste,  and  roving  still 
on  starless  waters  far  astray 
at  last  he  came  to  Night  of  Naught, 
and  passed,  and  never  sight  he  saw 
of  shining  shore  nor  light  he  sought. 

The  winds  of  wrath  came  driving  him, 
and  blindly  in  the  foam  he  fled 
from  west  to  east,  and  errandless, 
unheralded  he  homeward  sped. 

There  flying  Elwing  came  to  him, 
and  flame  was  in  the  darkness  lit; 
more  bright  than  light  of  diamond 
the  fire  upon  her  carcanet. 

The  Silmaril  she  bound  on  him 
and  crowned  him  with  the  living  light, 
and  dauntless  then  with  burning  brow 
he  turned  his  prow;  and  in  the  night 
from  Otherworld  beyond  the  Sea 
there  strong  and  free  a  storm  arose, 
a  wind  of  power  in  Tarmenel; 
by  paths  that  seldom  mortal  goes 
his  boat  it  bore  with  biting  breath 
as  might  of  death  across  the  grey 


306 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


and  long-forsaken  seas  distressed: 
from  east  to  west  he  passed  away. 

Through  Evernight  he  back  was  borne 
on  black  and  roaring  waves  that  ran 
o’er  leagues  unlit  and  foundered  shores 
that  drowned  before  the  Days  began, 
until  he  heard  on  strands  of  pearl 
where  ends  the  world  the  music  long, 
where  ever-foaming  billows  roll 
the  yellow  gold  and  jewels  wan. 

He  saw  the  Mountain  silent  rise 
where  twilight  lies  upon  the  knees 
of  Valinor,  and  Eldamar 
beheld  afar  beyond  the  seas. 

A  wanderer  escaped  from  night 
to  haven  white  he  came  at  last, 
to  Elvenhome  the  green  and  fair 
where  keen  the  air,  where  pale  as  glass 
beneath  the  Hill  of  Ilmarin 
a-glimmer  in  a  valley  sheer 
the  lamplit  towers  of  Tirion 
are  mirrored  on  the  Shadowmere. 

He  tarried  there  from  errantry, 
and  melodies  they  taught  to  him, 
and  sages  old  him  marvels  told, 
and  harps  of  gold  they  brought  to  him. 
They  clothed  him  then  in  elven-white, 
and  seven  lights  before  him  sent, 
as  through  the  Calacirian 
to  hidden  land  forlorn  he  went. 

He  came  unto  the  timeless  halls 
where  shining  fall  the  countless  years, 
and  endless  reigns  the  Elder  King 
in  Ilmarin  on  Mountain  sheer; 
and  words  unheard  were  spoken  then 


MANY  MEETINGS 


307 


of  folk  of  Men  and  Elven-kin, 
beyond  the  world  were  visions  showed 
forbid  to  those  that  dwell  therein. 

A  ship  then  new  they  built  for  him 
of  mithril  and  of  elven-glass 
with  shining  prow;  no  shaven  oar 
nor  sail  she  bore  on  silver  mast: 
the  Silmaril  as  lantern  light 
and  banner  bright  with  living  flame 
to  gleam  thereon  by  Elbereth 
herself  was  set,  who  thither  came 
and  wings  immortal  made  for  him, 
and  laid  on  him  undying  doom, 
to  sail  the  shoreless  skies  and  come 
behind  the  Sun  and  light  of  Moon. 

From  Evereven’s  lofty  hills 
where  softly  silver  fountains  fall 
his  wings  him  bore,  a  wandering  light, 
beyond  the  mighty  Mountain  Wall. 
From  World’s  End  then  he  turned  away, 
and  yearned  again  to  find  afar 
his  home  through  shadows  journeying, 
and  burning  as  an  island  star 
on  high  above  the  mists  he  came, 
a  distant  flame  before  the  Sun, 
a  wonder  ere  the  waking  dawn 
where  grey  the  Norland  waters  run. 

And  over  Middle-earth  he  passed 
and  heard  at  last  the  weeping  sore 
of  women  and  of  elven-maids 
in  Elder  Days,  in  years  of  yore. 

But  on  him  mighty  doom  was  laid, 
till  Moon  should  fade,  an  orbed  star 
to  pass,  and  tarry  never  more 


308 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


on  Hither  Shores  where  mortals  are; 
for  ever  still  a  herald  on 
an  errand  that  should  never  rest 
to  bear  his  shining  lamp  afar, 
the  Flammifer  of  Westernesse. 

The  chanting  ceased.  Frodo  opened  his  eyes  and  saw  that 
Bilbo  was  seated  on  his  stool  in  a  circle  of  listeners,  who  were 
smiling  and  applauding. 

‘Now  we  had  better  have  it  again,’  said  an  Elf. 

Bilbo  got  up  and  bowed.  ‘I  am  flattered,  Lindir,’  he  said. 
‘But  it  would  be  too  tiring  to  repeat  it  all.’ 

‘Not  too  tiring  for  you,’  the  Elves  answered  laughing.  ‘You 
know  you  are  never  tired  of  reciting  your  own  verses.  But 
really  we  cannot  answer  your  question  at  one  hearing!’ 

‘What!’  cried  Bilbo.  ‘You  can’t  tell  which  parts  were  mine, 
and  which  were  the  Dunadan’s?’ 

‘It  is  not  easy  for  us  to  tell  the  difference  between  two 
mortals,’  said  the  Elf. 

‘Nonsense,  Lindir,’  snorted  Bilbo.  ‘If  you  can’t  distinguish 
between  a  Man  and  a  Hobbit,  your  judgement  is  poorer  than 
I  imagined.  They’re  as  different  as  peas  and  apples.’ 

‘Maybe.  To  sheep  other  sheep  no  doubt  appear  different,’ 
laughed  Lindir.  ‘Or  to  shepherds.  But  Mortals  have  not  been 
our  study.  We  have  other  business.’ 

‘I  won’t  argue  with  you,’  said  Bilbo.  ‘I  am  sleepy  after  so 
much  music  and  singing.  I’ll  leave  you  to  guess,  if  you  want 
to.’ 

He  got  up  and  came  towards  Frodo.  Well,  that’s  over,’  he 
said  in  a  low  voice.  ‘It  went  off  better  than  I  expected.  I  don’t 
often  get  asked  for  a  second  hearing.  What  did  you  think 
of  it?’ 

‘I  am  not  going  to  try  and  guess,’  said  Frodo  smiling. 

‘You  needn’t,’  said  Bilbo.  ‘As  a  matter  of  fact  it  was  all 
mine.  Except  that  Aragorn  insisted  on  my  putting  in  a  green 
stone.  He  seemed  to  think  it  important.  I  don’t  know  why. 
Otherwise  he  obviously  thought  the  whole  thing  rather  above 


MANY  MEETINGS 


309 


my  head,  and  he  said  that  if  I  had  the  cheek  to  make  verses 
about  Earendil  in  the  house  of  Elrond,  it  was  my  affair.  I 
suppose  he  was  right.’ 

‘I  don’t  know,’  said  Frodo.  ‘It  seemed  to  me  to  fit  somehow, 
though  I  can’t  explain.  I  was  half  asleep  when  you  began, 
and  it  seemed  to  follow  on  from  something  that  I  was  dream¬ 
ing  about.  I  didn’t  understand  that  it  was  really  you  speaking 
until  near  the  end.’ 

‘It  is  difficult  to  keep  awake  here,  until  you  get  used  to  it,’ 
said  Bilbo.  ‘Not  that  hobbits  would  ever  acquire  quite  the 
Elvish  appetite  for  music  and  poetry  and  tales.  They  seem  to 
like  them  as  much  as  food,  or  more.  They  will  be  going  on 
for  a  long  time  yet.  What  do  you  say  to  slipping  off  for  some 
more  quiet  talk?’ 

‘Can  we?’  said  Frodo. 

‘Of  course.  This  is  merrymaking  not  business.  Come  and 
go  as  you  like,  as  long  as  you  don’t  make  a  noise.’ 

They  got  up  and  withdrew  quietly  into  the  shadows,  and 
made  for  the  doors.  Sam  they  left  behind,  fast  asleep  still  with 
a  smile  on  his  face.  In  spite  of  his  delight  in  Bilbo’s  company 
Frodo  felt  a  tug  of  regret  as  they  passed  out  of  the  Hall  of 
Fire.  Even  as  they  stepped  over  the  threshold  a  single  clear 
voice  rose  in  song. 

A  Elbereth  Gilthoniel, 
silivren  penna  miriel 
0  menel  aglar  elenath! 

Na-chaered  palan-diriel 
0  galadhremmin  ennorath, 

Fanuilos,  le  linnathon 
nef  aear,  si  nef  aearon! 

Frodo  halted  for  a  moment,  looking  back.  Elrond  was  in 
his  chair  and  the  fire  was  on  his  face  like  summer-light  upon 
the  trees.  Near  him  sat  the  Lady  Arwen.  To  his  surprise 
Frodo  saw  that  Aragorn  stood  beside  her;  his  dark  cloak  was 


3io 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


thrown  back,  and  he  seemed  to  be  clad  in  elven-mail,  and  a 
star  shone  on  his  breast.  They  spoke  together,  and  then  sud¬ 
denly  it  seemed  to  Frodo  that  Arwen  turned  towards  him, 
and  the  light  of  her  eyes  fell  on  him  from  afar  and  pierced 
his  heart. 

He  stood  still  enchanted,  while  the  sweet  syllables  of  the 
Elvish  song  fell  like  clear  jewels  of  blended  word  and  melody. 
‘It  is  a  song  to  Elbereth,’  said  Bilbo.  ‘They  will  sing  that,  and 
other  songs  of  the  Blessed  Realm,  many  times  tonight.  Come 
on!’ 

He  led  Frodo  back  to  his  own  little  room.  It  opened  on  to 
the  gardens  and  looked  south  across  the  ravine  of  the 
Bruinen.  There  they  sat  for  some  while,  looking  through  the 
window  at  the  bright  stars  above  the  steep-climbing  woods, 
and  talking  softly.  They  spoke  no  more  of  the  small  news  of 
the  Shire  far  away,  nor  of  the  dark  shadows  and  perils  that 
encompassed  them,  but  of  the  fair  things  they  had  seen  in 
the  world  together,  of  the  Elves,  of  the  stars,  of  trees,  and  the 
gentle  fall  of  the  bright  year  in  the  woods. 

At  last  there  came  a  knock  on  the  door.  ‘Begging  your 
pardon,’  said  Sam,  putting  in  his  head,  ‘but  I  was  just  wonder¬ 
ing  if  you  would  be  wanting  anything.’ 

‘And  begging  yours,  Sam  Gamgee,’  replied  Bilbo.  ‘I  guess 
you  mean  that  it  is  time  your  master  went  to  bed.’ 

‘Well,  sir,  there  is  a  Council  early  tomorrow,  I  hear,  and 
he  only  got  up  today  for  the  first  time.’ 

‘Quite  right,  Sam,’  laughed  Bilbo.  ‘You  can  trot  off  and 
tell  Gandalf  that  he  has  gone  to  bed.  Good  night,  Frodo! 
Bless  me,  but  it  has  been  good  to  see  you  again!  There  are 
no  folk  like  hobbits  after  all  for  a  real  good  talk.  I  am  getting 
very  old,  and  I  began  to  wonder  if  I  should  live  to  see  your 
chapters  of  our  story.  Good  night!  I’ll  take  a  walk,  I  think, 
and  look  at  the  stars  of  Elbereth  in  the  garden.  Sleep  well!’ 


Chapter  2 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


Next  day  Frodo  woke  early,  feeling  refreshed  and  well.  He 
walked  along  the  terraces  above  the  loud-flowing  Bruinen 
and  watched  the  pale,  cool  sun  rise  above  the  far  mountains, 
and  shine  down,  slanting  through  the  thin  silver  mist;  the 
dew  upon  the  yellow  leaves  was  glimmering,  and  the  woven 
nets  of  gossamer  twinkled  on  every  bush.  Sam  walked  beside 
him,  saying  nothing,  but  sniffing  the  air,  and  looking  every 
now  and  again  with  wonder  in  his  eyes  at  the  great  heights 
in  the  East.  The  snow  was  white  upon  their  peaks. 

On  a  seat  cut  in  the  stone  beside  a  turn  in  the  path  they 
came  upon  Gandalf  and  Bilbo  deep  in  talk.  ‘Hullo!  Good 
morning!’  said  Bilbo.  ‘Feel  ready  for  the  great  council?’ 

‘I  feel  ready  for  anything,’  answered  Frodo.  ‘But  most  of 
all  I  should  like  to  go  walking  today  and  explore  the  valley.  I 
should  like  to  get  into  those  pine -woods  up  there.’  He  pointed 
away  far  up  the  side  of  Rivendell  to  the  north. 

‘You  may  have  a  chance  later,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘But  we  cannot 
make  any  plans  yet.  There  is  much  to  hear  and  decide  today.’ 

Suddenly  as  they  were  talking  a  single  clear  bell  rang  out. 
‘That  is  the  warning  bell  for  the  Council  of  Elrond,’  cried 
Gandalf.  ‘Come  along  now!  Both  you  and  Bilbo  are  wanted.’ 

Frodo  and  Bilbo  followed  the  wizard  quickly  along  the 
winding  path  back  to  the  house;  behind  them,  uninvited  and 
for  the  moment  forgotten,  trotted  Sam. 

Gandalf  led  them  to  the  porch  where  Frodo  had  found  his 
friends  the  evening  before.  The  light  of  the  clear  autumn 
morning  was  now  glowing  in  the  valley.  The  noise  of  bub¬ 
bling  waters  came  up  from  the  foaming  river-bed.  Birds  were 
singing,  and  a  wholesome  peace  lay  on  the  land.  To  Frodo 


312  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

his  dangerous  flight,  and  the  rumours  of  the  darkness  growing 
in  the  world  outside,  already  seemed  only  the  memories  of  a 
troubled  dream;  but  the  faces  that  were  turned  to  meet  them 
as  they  entered  were  grave. 

Elrond  was  there,  and  several  others  were  seated  in  silence 
about  him.  Frodo  saw  Glorfindel  and  Gloin;  and  in  a  corner 
alone  Strider  was  sitting,  clad  in  his  old  travel-worn  clothes 
again.  Elrond  drew  Frodo  to  a  seat  by  his  side,  and  presented 
him  to  the  company,  saying: 

‘Here,  my  friends,  is  the  hobbit,  Frodo  son  of  Drogo.  Few 
have  ever  come  hither  through  greater  peril  or  on  an  errand 
more  urgent.’ 

He  then  pointed  out  and  named  those  whom  Frodo  had 
not  met  before.  There  was  a  younger  dwarf  at  Gloin’s  side: 
his  son  Gimli.  Beside  Glorfindel  there  were  several  other 
counsellors  of  Elrond’s  household,  of  whom  Erestor  was  the 
chief;  and  with  him  was  Galdor,  an  Elf  from  the  Grey  Havens 
who  had  come  on  an  errand  from  Cirdan  the  Shipwright. 
There  was  also  a  strange  Elf  clad  in  green  and  brown, 
Legolas,  a  messenger  from  his  father,  Thranduil,  the  King  of 
the  Elves  of  Northern  Mirkwood.  And  seated  a  little  apart 
was  a  tall  man  with  a  fair  and  noble  face,  dark-haired  and 
grey-eyed,  proud  and  stern  of  glance. 

He  was  cloaked  and  booted  as  if  for  a  journey  on  horse¬ 
back;  and  indeed  though  his  garments  were  rich,  and  his 
cloak  was  lined  with  fur,  they  were  stained  with  long  travel. 
He  had  a  collar  of  silver  in  which  a  single  white  stone  was 
set;  his  locks  were  shorn  about  his  shoulders.  On  a  baldric  he 
wore  a  great  horn  Upped  with  silver  that  now  was  laid  upon 
his  knees.  He  gazed  at  Frodo  and  Bilbo  with  sudden  wonder. 

‘Here,’  said  Elrond,  turning  to  Gandalf,  ‘is  Boromir,  a  man 
from  the  South.  He  arrived  in  the  grey  morning,  and  seeks 
for  counsel.  I  have  bidden  him  to  be  present,  for  here  his 
questions  will  be  answered.’ 

Not  all  that  was  spoken  and  debated  in  the  Council  need 
now  be  told.  Much  was  said  of  events  in  the  world  outside, 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


313 


especially  in  the  South,  and  in  the  wide  lands  east  of  the 
Mountains.  Of  these  things  Frodo  had  already  heard  many 
rumours;  but  the  tale  of  Gloin  was  new  to  him,  and  when  the 
dwarf  spoke  he  listened  attentively.  It  appeared  that  amid  the 
splendour  of  their  works  of  hand  the  hearts  of  the  Dwarves 
of  the  Lonely  Mountain  were  troubled. 

‘It  is  now  many  years  ago,’  said  Gloin,  ‘that  a  shadow  of 
disquiet  fell  upon  our  people.  Whence  it  came  we  did  not  at 
first  perceive.  Words  began  to  be  whispered  in  secret:  it  was 
said  that  we  were  hemmed  in  a  narrow  place,  and  that  greater 
wealth  and  splendour  would  be  found  in  a  wider  world.  Some 
spoke  of  Moria:  the  mighty  works  of  our  fathers  that  are 
called  in  our  own  tongue  Khazad-dum;  and  they  declared 
that  now  at  last  we  had  the  power  and  numbers  to  return.’ 

Gloin  sighed.  ‘Moria!  Moria!  Wonder  of  the  Northern 
world!  Too  deep  we  delved  there,  and  woke  the  nameless 
fear.  Long  have  its  vast  mansions  lain  empty  since  the  chil¬ 
dren  of  Durin  fled.  But  now  we  spoke  of  it  again  with  longing, 
and  yet  with  dread;  for  no  dwarf  has  dared  to  pass  the  doors 
of  Khazad-dum  for  many  lives  of  kings,  save  Thror  only,  and 
he  perished.  At  last,  however,  Balin  listened  to  the  whispers, 
and  resolved  to  go;  and  though  Dain  did  not  give  leave  will¬ 
ingly,  he  took  with  him  Ori  and  Oin  and  many  of  our  folk, 
and  they  went  away  south. 

‘That  was  nigh  on  thirty  years  ago.  For  a  while  we  had 
news  and  it  seemed  good:  messages  reported  that  Moria  had 
been  entered  and  a  great  work  begun  there.  Then  there  was 
silence,  and  no  word  has  ever  come  from  Moria  since. 

‘Then  about  a  year  ago  a  messenger  came  to  Dain,  but  not 
from  Moria  -  from  Mordor:  a  horseman  in  the  night,  who 
called  Dain  to  his  gate.  The  Lord  Sauron  the  Great,  so  he 
said,  wished  for  our  friendship.  Rings  he  would  give  for  it, 
such  as  he  gave  of  old.  And  he  asked  urgently  concerning 
hobbits ,  of  what  land  they  were,  and  where  they  dwelt.  “For 
Sauron  knows,”  said  he,  “that  one  of  these  was  known  to 
you  on  a  time.” 

‘At  this  we  were  greatly  troubled,  and  we  gave  no  answer. 


314 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


And  then  his  fell  voice  was  lowered,  and  he  would  have 
sweetened  it  if  he  could.  “As  a  small  token  only  of  your 
friendship  Sauron  asks  this,”  he  said:  “that  you  should  find 
this  thief,”  such  was  his  word,  “and  get  from  him,  willing  or 
no,  a  little  ring,  the  least  of  rings,  that  once  he  stole.  It  is  but 
a  trifle  that  Sauron  fancies,  and  an  earnest  of  your  good  will. 
Find  it,  and  three  rings  that  the  Dwarf-sires  possessed  of  old 
shall  be  returned  to  you,  and  the  realm  of  Moria  shall  be 
yours  for  ever.  Find  only  news  of  the  thief,  whether  he  still 
lives  and  where,  and  you  shall  have  great  reward  and  lasting 
friendship  from  the  Lord.  Refuse,  and  things  will  not  seem 
so  well.  Do  you  refuse?” 

‘At  that  his  breath  came  like  the  hiss  of  snakes,  and  all  who 
stood  by  shuddered,  but  Dain  said:  “I  say  neither  yea  nor 
nay.  I  must  consider  this  message  and  what  it  means  under 
its  fair  cloak.” 

‘  “Consider  well,  but  not  too  long,”  said  he. 

‘  “The  time  of  my  thought  is  my  own  to  spend,”  answered 
Dain. 

‘  “For  the  present,”  said  he,  and  rode  into  the  darkness. 

‘Heavy  have  the  hearts  of  our  chieftains  been  since  that 
night.  We  needed  not  the  fell  voice  of  the  messenger  to  warn 
us  that  his  words  held  both  menace  and  deceit;  for  we  knew 
already  that  the  power  that  has  re-entered  Mordor  has  not 
changed,  and  ever  it  betrayed  us  of  old.  Twice  the  messenger 
has  returned,  and  has  gone  unanswered.  The  third  and  last 
time,  so  he  says,  is  soon  to  come,  before  the  ending  of  the 
year. 

‘And  so  I  have  been  sent  at  last  by  Dain  to  warn  Bilbo  that 
he  is  sought  by  the  Enemy,  and  to  learn,  if  may  be,  why  he 
desires  this  ring,  this  least  of  rings.  Also  we  crave  the  advice 
of  Elrond.  For  the  Shadow  grows  and  draws  nearer.  We 
discover  that  messengers  have  come  also  to  King  Brand  in 
Dale,  and  that  he  is  afraid.  We  fear  that  he  may  yield.  Already 
war  is  gathering  on  his  eastern  borders.  If  we  make  no  answer, 
the  Enemy  may  move  Men  of  his  rule  to  assail  King  Brand, 
and  Dain  also.’ 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


315 


‘You  have  done  well  to  come,’  said  Elrond.  ‘You  will  hear 
today  all  that  you  need  in  order  to  understand  the  purposes 
of  the  Enemy.  There  is  naught  that  you  can  do,  other  than 
to  resist,  with  hope  or  without  it.  But  you  do  not  stand  alone. 
You  will  learn  that  your  trouble  is  but  part  of  the  trouble  of 
all  the  western  world.  The  Ring!  What  shall  we  do  with  the 
Ring,  the  least  of  rings,  the  trifle  that  Sauron  fancies?  That 
is  the  doom  that  we  must  deem. 

‘That  is  the  purpose  for  which  you  are  called  hither.  Called, 
I  say,  though  I  have  not  called  you  to  me,  strangers  from 
distant  lands.  You  have  come  and  are  here  met,  in  this  very 
nick  of  time,  by  chance  as  it  may  seem.  Yet  it  is  not  so. 
Believe  rather  that  it  is  so  ordered  that  we,  who  sit  here, 
and  none  others,  must  now  find  counsel  for  the  peril  of  the 
world. 

‘Now,  therefore,  things  shall  be  openly  spoken  that  have 
been  hidden  from  all  but  a  few  until  this  day.  And  first,  so 
that  all  may  understand  what  is  the  peril,  the  Tale  of  the  Ring 
shall  be  told  from  the  beginning  even  to  this  present.  And  I 
will  begin  that  tale,  though  others  shall  end  it.’ 

Then  all  listened  while  Elrond  in  his  clear  voice  spoke  of 
Sauron  and  the  Rings  of  Power,  and  their  forging  in  the 
Second  Age  of  the  world  long  ago.  A  part  of  his  tale  was 
known  to  some  there,  but  the  full  tale  to  none,  and  many 
eyes  were  turned  to  Elrond  in  fear  and  wonder  as  he  told  of 
the  Elven-smiths  of  Eregion  and  their  friendship  with  Moria, 
and  their  eagerness  for  knowledge,  by  which  Sauron  ensnared 
them.  For  in  that  time  he  was  not  yet  evil  to  behold,  and  they 
received  his  aid  and  grew  mighty  in  craft,  whereas  he  learned 
all  their  secrets,  and  betrayed  them,  and  forged  secretly  in 
the  Mountain  of  Fire  the  One  Ring  to  be  their  master.  But 
Celebrimbor  was  aware  of  him,  and  hid  the  Three  which  he 
had  made;  and  there  was  war,  and  the  land  was  laid  waste, 
and  the  gate  of  Moria  was  shut. 

Then  through  all  the  years  that  followed  he  traced  the 
Ring;  but  since  that  history  is  elsewhere  recounted,  even  as 


3i6 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Elrond  himself  set  it  down  in  his  books  of  lore,  it  is  not  here 
recalled.  For  it  is  a  long  tale,  full  of  deeds  great  and  terrible, 
and  briefly  though  Elrond  spoke,  the  sun  rode  up  the  sky, 
and  the  morning  was  passing  ere  he  ceased. 

Of  Numenor  he  spoke,  its  glory  and  its  fall,  and  the  return 
of  the  Kings  of  Men  to  Middle-earth  out  of  the  deeps  of  the 
Sea,  borne  upon  the  wings  of  storm.  Then  Elendil  the  Tall 
and  his  mighty  sons,  Isildur  and  Anarion,  became  great  lords; 
and  the  North-realm  they  made  in  Arnor,  and  the  South- 
realm  in  Gondor  above  the  mouths  of  Anduin.  But  Sauron 
of  Mordor  assailed  them,  and  they  made  the  Last  Alliance  of 
Elves  and  Men,  and  the  hosts  of  Gil-galad  and  Elendil  were 
mustered  in  Arnor. 

Thereupon  Elrond  paused  a  while  and  sighed.  ‘I  remember 
well  the  splendour  of  their  banners,’  he  said.  ‘It  recalled  to 
me  the  glory  of  the  Elder  Days  and  the  hosts  of  Beleriand, 
so  many  great  princes  and  captains  were  assembled.  And  yet 
not  so  many,  nor  so  fair,  as  when  Thangorodrim  was  broken, 
and  the  Elves  deemed  that  evil  was  ended  for  ever,  and  it  was 
not  so.’ 

‘You  remember?’  said  Frodo,  speaking  his  thought  aloud 
in  his  astonishment.  ‘But  I  thought,’  he  stammered  as  Elrond 
turned  towards  him,  ‘I  thought  that  the  fall  of  Gil-galad  was 
a  long  age  ago.’ 

‘So  it  was  indeed,’  answered  Elrond  gravely.  ‘But  my 
memory  reaches  back  even  to  the  Elder  Days.  Earendil  was 
my  sire,  who  was  born  in  Gondolin  before  its  fall;  and  my 
mother  was  Elwing,  daughter  of  Dior,  son  of  Luthien  of 
Doriath.  I  have  seen  three  ages  in  the  West  of  the  world,  and 
many  defeats,  and  many  fruitless  victories. 

‘I  was  the  herald  of  Gil-galad  and  marched  with  his  host. 
I  was  at  the  Battle  of  Dagorlad  before  the  Black  Gate  of 
Mordor,  where  we  had  the  mastery:  for  the  Spear  of  Gil-galad 
and  the  Sword  of  Elendil,  Aeglos  and  Narsil,  none  could 
withstand.  I  beheld  the  last  combat  on  the  slopes  of  Orodruin, 
where  Gil-galad  died,  and  Elendil  fell,  and  Narsil  broke 
beneath  him;  but  Sauron  himself  was  overthrown,  and  Isildur 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND  317 

cut  the  Ring  from  his  hand  with  the  hilt-shard  of  his  father’s 
sword,  and  took  it  for  his  own.’ 

At  this  the  stranger,  Boromir,  broke  in.  ‘So  that  is  what 
became  of  the  Ring!’  he  cried.  ‘If  ever  such  a  tale  was  told  in 
the  South,  it  has  long  been  forgotten.  I  have  heard  of  the 
Great  Ring  of  him  that  we  do  not  name;  but  we  believed  that 
it  perished  from  the  world  in  the  ruin  of  his  first  realm.  Isildur 
took  it!  That  is  tidings  indeed.’ 

‘Alas!  yes,’  said  Elrond.  ‘Isildur  took  it,  as  should  not  have 
been.  It  should  have  been  cast  then  into  Orodruin’s  fire  nigh 
at  hand  where  it  was  made.  But  few  marked  what  Isildur  did. 
He  alone  stood  by  his  father  in  that  last  mortal  contest;  and 
by  Gil-galad  only  Cirdan  stood,  and  I.  But  Isildur  would  not 
listen  to  our  counsel. 

‘  “This  I  will  have  as  weregild  for  my  father,  and  my 
brother,”  he  said;  and  therefore  whether  we  would  or  no,  he 
took  it  to  treasure  it.  But  soon  he  was  betrayed  by  it  to  his 
death;  and  so  it  is  named  in  the  North  Isildur’s  Bane.  Yet 
death  maybe  was  better  than  what  else  might  have  befallen 
him. 

‘Only  to  the  North  did  these  tidings  come,  and  only  to  a 
few.  Small  wonder  is  it  that  you  have  not  heard  them, 
Boromir.  From  the  ruin  of  the  Gladden  Fields,  where  Isildur 
perished,  three  men  only  came  ever  back  over  the  mountains 
after  long  wandering.  One  of  these  was  Ohtar,  the  esquire  of 
Isildur,  who  bore  the  shards  of  the  sword  of  Elendil;  and  he 
brought  them  to  Valandil,  the  heir  of  Isildur,  who  being  but 
a  child  had  remained  here  in  Rivendell.  But  Narsil  was  broken 
and  its  light  extinguished,  and  it  has  not  yet  been  forged 
again. 

‘Fruitless  did  I  call  the  victory  of  the  Last  Alliance?  Not 
wholly  so,  yet  it  did  not  achieve  its  end.  Sauron  was  dimin¬ 
ished,  but  not  destroyed.  His  Ring  was  lost  but  not  unmade. 
The  Dark  Tower  was  broken,  but  its  foundations  were  not 
removed;  for  they  were  made  with  the  power  of  the  Ring, 
and  while  it  remains  they  will  endure.  Many  Elves  and  many 
mighty  Men,  and  many  of  their  friends,  had  perished  in  the 


318  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

war.  Anarion  was  slain,  and  Isildur  was  slain;  and  Gil-galad 
and  Elendil  were  no  more.  Never  again  shall  there  be  any 
such  league  of  Elves  and  Men;  for  Men  multiply  and  the 
Firstborn  decrease,  and  the  two  kindreds  are  estranged.  And 
ever  since  that  day  the  race  of  Numenor  has  decayed,  and 
the  span  of  their  years  has  lessened. 

‘In  the  North  after  the  war  and  the  slaughter  of  the  Gladden 
Fields  the  Men  of  Westernesse  were  diminished,  and  their 
city  of  Annuminas  beside  Lake  Evendim  fell  into  ruin;  and 
the  heirs  of  Valandil  removed  and  dwelt  at  Fornost  on  the 
high  North  Downs,  and  that  now  too  is  desolate.  Men  call  it 
Deadmen’s  Dike,  and  they  fear  to  tread  there.  For  the  folk 
of  Arnor  dwindled,  and  their  foes  devoured  them,  and  their 
lordship  passed,  leaving  only  green  mounds  in  the  grassy 
hills. 

‘In  the  South  the  realm  of  Gondor  long  endured;  and  for 
a  while  its  splendour  grew,  recalling  somewhat  of  the  might 
of  Numenor,  ere  it  fell.  High  towers  that  people  built,  and 
strong  places,  and  havens  of  many  ships;  and  the  winged 
crown  of  the  Kings  of  Men  was  held  in  awe  by  folk  of  many 
tongues.  Their  chief  city  was  Osgiliath,  Citadel  of  the  Stars, 
through  the  midst  of  which  the  River  flowed.  And  Minas 
Ithil  they  built,  Tower  of  the  Rising  Moon,  eastward  upon  a 
shoulder  of  the  Mountains  of  Shadow;  and  westward  at  the 
feet  of  the  White  Mountains  Minas  Anor  they  made,  Tower 
of  the  Setting  Sun.  There  in  the  courts  of  the  King  grew  a 
white  tree,  from  the  seed  of  that  tree  which  Isildur  brought 
over  the  deep  waters,  and  the  seed  of  that  tree  before  came 
from  Eressea,  and  before  that  out  of  the  Uttermost  West  in 
the  Day  before  days  when  the  world  was  young. 

‘But  in  the  wearing  of  the  swift  years  of  Middle-earth  the 
line  of  Meneldil  son  of  Anarion  failed,  and  the  Tree  withered, 
and  the  blood  of  the  Numenoreans  became  mingled  with  that 
of  lesser  men.  Then  the  watch  upon  the  walls  of  Mordor 
slept,  and  dark  things  crept  back  to  Gorgoroth.  And  on  a 
time  evil  things  came  forth,  and  they  took  Minas  Ithil  and 
abode  in  it,  and  they  made  it  into  a  place  of  dread;  and  it  is 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


319 


called  Minas  Morgul,  the  Tower  of  Sorcery.  Then  Minas 
Anor  was  named  anew  Minas  Tirith,  the  Tower  of  Guard; 
and  these  two  cities  were  ever  at  war,  but  Osgiliath  which  lay 
between  was  deserted  and  in  its  ruins  shadows  walked. 

‘So  it  has  been  for  many  lives  of  men.  But  the  Lords  of 
Minas  Tirith  still  fight  on,  defying  our  enemies,  keeping  the 
passage  of  the  River  from  Argonath  to  the  Sea.  And  now  that 
part  of  the  tale  that  I  shall  tell  is  drawn  to  its  close.  For  in  the 
days  of  Isildur  the  Ruling  Ring  passed  out  of  all  knowledge, 
and  the  Three  were  released  from  its  dominion.  But  now  in 
this  latter  day  they  are  in  peril  once  more,  for  to  our  sorrow 
the  One  has  been  found.  Others  shall  speak  of  its  finding,  for 
in  that  I  played  small  part.’ 

He  ceased,  but  at  once  Boromir  stood  up,  tall  and  proud, 
before  them.  ‘Give  me  leave,  Master  Elrond,’  said  he,  ‘first 
to  say  more  of  Gondor,  for  verily  from  the  land  of  Gondor  I 
am  come.  And  it  would  be  well  for  all  to  know  what  passes 
there.  For  few,  I  deem,  know  of  our  deeds,  and  therefore 
guess  little  at  their  peril,  if  we  should  fail  at  last. 

‘Believe  not  that  in  the  land  of  Gondor  the  blood  of 
Numenor  is  spent,  nor  all  its  pride  and  dignity  forgotten.  By 
our  valour  the  wild  folk  of  the  East  are  still  restrained,  and 
the  terror  of  Morgul  kept  at  bay;  and  thus  alone  are  peace 
and  freedom  maintained  in  the  lands  behind  us,  bulwark  of 
the  West.  But  if  the  passages  of  the  River  should  be  won, 
what  then? 

‘Yet  that  hour,  maybe,  is  not  now  far  away.  The  Name¬ 
less  Enemy  has  arisen  again.  Smoke  rises  once  more  from 
Orodruin  that  we  call  Mount  Doom.  The  power  of  the  Black 
Land  grows  and  we  are  hard  beset.  When  the  Enemy  re¬ 
turned  our  folk  were  driven  from  Ithilien,  our  fair  domain  east 
of  the  River,  though  we  kept  a  foothold  there  and  strength  of 
arms.  But  this  very  year,  in  the  days  of  June,  sudden  war 
came  upon  us  out  of  Mordor,  and  we  were  swept  away. 
We  were  outnumbered,  for  Mordor  has  allied  itself  with  the 
Easterlings  and  the  cruel  Haradrim;  but  it  was  not  by 


320 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


numbers  that  we  were  defeated.  A  power  was  there  that  we 
have  not  felt  before. 

‘Some  said  that  it  could  be  seen,  like  a  great  black  horse¬ 
man,  a  dark  shadow  under  the  moon.  Wherever  he  came  a 
madness  filled  our  foes,  but  fear  fell  on  our  boldest,  so  that 
horse  and  man  gave  way  and  fled.  Only  a  remnant  of  our 
eastern  force  came  back,  destroying  the  last  bridge  that  still 
stood  amid  the  ruins  of  Osgiliath. 

‘I  was  in  the  company  that  held  the  bridge,  until  it  was  cast 
down  behind  us.  Four  only  were  saved  by  swimming:  my 
brother  and  myself  and  two  others.  But  still  we  fight  on, 
holding  all  the  west  shores  of  Anduin;  and  those  who  shelter 
behind  us  give  us  praise,  if  ever  they  hear  our  name:  much 
praise  but  little  help.  Only  from  Rohan  now  will  any  men 
ride  to  us  when  we  call. 

‘In  this  evil  hour  I  have  come  on  an  errand  over  many 
dangerous  leagues  to  Elrond:  a  hundred  and  ten  days  I  have 
journeyed  all  alone.  But  I  do  not  seek  allies  in  war.  The  might 
of  Elrond  is  in  wisdom  not  in  weapons,  it  is  said.  I  come  to 
ask  for  counsel  and  the  unravelling  of  hard  words.  For  on  the 
eve  of  the  sudden  assault  a  dream  came  to  my  brother  in  a 
troubled  sleep;  and  afterwards  a  like  dream  came  oft  to  him 
again,  and  once  to  me. 

‘In  that  dream  I  thought  the  eastern  sky  grew  dark  and 
there  was  a  growing  thunder,  but  in  the  West  a  pale  light 
lingered,  and  out  of  it  I  heard  a  voice,  remote  but  clear, 
crying: 


Seek  for  the  Sword  that  was  broken: 

In  Imladris  it  dwells; 

There  shall  be  counsels  taken 
Stronger  than  Morgul-spells. 

There  shall  be  shown  a  token 
That  Doom  is  near  at  hand, 

For  Isildur’s  Bane  shall  waken, 

And  the  Halfling  forth  shall  stand. 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


321 


Of  these  words  we  could  understand  little,  and  we  spoke  to 
our  father,  Denethor,  Lord  of  Minas  Tirith,  wise  in  the  lore 
of  Gondor.  This  only  would  he  say,  that  Imladris  was  of  old 
the  name  among  the  Elves  of  a  far  northern  dale,  where 
Elrond  the  Halfelven  dwelt,  greatest  of  lore -masters.  There¬ 
fore  my  brother,  seeing  how  desperate  was  our  need,  was 
eager  to  heed  the  dream  and  seek  for  Imladris;  but  since  the 
way  was  full  of  doubt  and  danger,  I  took  the  journey  upon 
myself.  Loth  was  my  father  to  give  me  leave,  and  long  have 
I  wandered  by  roads  forgotten,  seeking  the  house  of  Elrond, 
of  which  many  had  heard,  but  few  knew  where  it  lay.’ 

‘And  here  in  the  house  of  Elrond  more  shall  be  made  clear 
to  you,’  said  Aragorn,  standing  up.  He  cast  his  sword  upon 
the  table  that  stood  before  Elrond,  and  the  blade  was  in  two 
pieces.  ‘Here  is  the  Sword  that  was  Broken!’  he  said. 

‘And  who  are  you,  and  what  have  you  to  do  with  Minas 
Tirith?’  asked  Boromir,  looking  in  wonder  at  the  lean  face  of 
the  Ranger  and  his  weather-stained  cloak. 

‘He  is  Aragorn  son  of  Arathorn,’  said  Elrond;  ‘and  he  is 
descended  through  many  fathers  from  Isildur  Elendil’s  son 
of  Minas  Ithil.  He  is  the  Chief  of  the  Dunedain  in  the  North, 
and  few  are  now  left  of  that  folk.’ 

‘Then  it  belongs  to  you,  and  not  to  me  at  all!’  cried  Frodo 
in  amazement,  springing  to  his  feet,  as  if  he  expected  the 
Ring  to  be  demanded  at  once. 

‘It  does  not  belong  to  either  of  us,’  said  Aragorn;  ‘but  it 
has  been  ordained  that  you  should  hold  it  for  a  while.’ 

‘Bring  out  the  Ring,  Frodo!’  said  Gandalf  solemnly.  ‘The 
time  has  come.  Hold  it  up,  and  then  Boromir  will  understand 
the  remainder  of  his  riddle.’ 

There  was  a  hush,  and  all  turned  their  eyes  on  Frodo.  He 
was  shaken  by  a  sudden  shame  and  fear;  and  he  felt  a  great 
reluctance  to  reveal  the  Ring,  and  a  loathing  of  its  touch.  He 
wished  he  was  far  away.  The  Ring  gleamed  and  flickered  as 
he  held  it  up  before  them  in  his  trembling  hand. 


322 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Behold  Isildur’s  Bane!’  said  Elrond. 

Boromir’s  eyes  glinted  as  he  gazed  at  the  golden  thing. 
‘The  Halfling!’  he  muttered.  ‘Is  then  the  doom  of  Minas  Tirith 
come  at  last?  But  why  then  should  we  seek  a  broken  sword?’ 

‘The  words  were  not  the  doom  of  Minas  Tirith ,’  said 
Aragorn.  ‘But  doom  and  great  deeds  are  indeed  at  hand.  For 
the  Sword  that  was  Broken  is  the  Sword  of  Elendil  that  broke 
beneath  him  when  he  fell.  It  has  been  treasured  by  his  heirs 
when  all  other  heirlooms  were  lost;  for  it  was  spoken  of  old 
among  us  that  it  should  be  made  again  when  the  Ring, 
Isildur’s  Bane,  was  found.  Now  you  have  seen  the  sword  that 
you  have  sought,  what  would  you  ask?  Do  you  wish  for  the 
House  of  Elendil  to  return  to  the  Land  of  Gondor?’ 

‘I  was  not  sent  to  beg  any  boon,  but  to  seek  only  the 
meaning  of  a  riddle,’  answered  Boromir  proudly.  ‘Yet  we  are 
hard  pressed,  and  the  Sword  of  Elendil  would  be  a  help 
beyond  our  hope  -  if  such  a  thing  could  indeed  return  out  of 
the  shadows  of  the  past.’  He  looked  again  at  Aragorn,  and 
doubt  was  in  his  eyes. 

Frodo  felt  Bilbo  stir  impatiently  at  his  side.  Evidently  he 
was  annoyed  on  his  friend’s  behalf.  Standing  suddenly  up  he 
burst  out: 

All  that  is  gold  does  not  glitter, 

Not  all  those  who  wander  are  lost; 

The  old  that  is  strong  does  not  wither, 

Deep  roots  are  not  reached  by  the  frost. 

From  the  ashes  afire  shall  be  woken, 

A  light  from  the  shadows  shall  spring; 

Renewed  shall  be  blade  that  was  broken: 

The  crownless  again  shall  be  king. 

‘Not  very  good  perhaps,  but  to  the  point  -  if  you  need  more 
beyond  the  word  of  Elrond.  If  that  was  worth  a  journey  of  a 
hundred  and  ten  days  to  hear,  you  had  best  listen  to  it.’  He 
sat  down  with  a  snort. 

‘I  made  that  up  myself,’  he  whispered  to  Frodo,  ‘for  the 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


323 


Dunadan,  a  long  time  ago  when  he  first  told  me  about  him¬ 
self.  I  almost  wish  that  my  adventures  were  not  over,  and 
that  I  could  go  with  him  when  his  day  comes.’ 

Aragorn  smiled  at  him;  then  he  turned  to  Boromir  again. 
‘For  my  part  I  forgive  your  doubt,’  he  said.  ‘Little  do  I 
resemble  the  figures  of  Elendil  and  Isildur  as  they  stand 
carven  in  their  majesty  in  the  halls  of  Denethor.  I  am  but  the 
heir  of  Isildur,  not  Isildur  himself.  I  have  had  a  hard  life  and 
a  long;  and  the  leagues  that  lie  between  here  and  Gondor  are 
a  small  part  in  the  count  of  my  journeys.  I  have  crossed  many 
mountains  and  many  rivers,  and  trodden  many  plains,  even 
into  the  far  countries  of  Rhun  and  Flarad  where  the  stars  are 
strange. 

‘But  my  home,  such  as  I  have,  is  in  the  North.  For  here 
the  heirs  of  Valandil  have  ever  dwelt  in  long  line  unbroken 
from  father  unto  son  for  many  generations.  Our  days  have 
darkened,  and  we  have  dwindled;  but  ever  the  Sword  has 
passed  to  a  new  keeper.  And  this  I  will  say  to  you,  Boromir, 
ere  I  end.  Lonely  men  are  we,  Rangers  of  the  wild,  hunters 
-  but  hunters  ever  of  the  servants  of  the  Enemy;  for  they  are 
found  in  many  places,  not  in  Mordor  only. 

‘If  Gondor,  Boromir,  has  been  a  stalwart  tower,  we  have 
played  another  part.  Many  evil  things  there  are  that  your 
strong  walls  and  bright  swords  do  not  stay.  You  know  little 
of  the  lands  beyond  your  bounds.  Peace  and  freedom,  do 
you  say?  The  North  would  have  known  them  little  but  for 
us.  Fear  would  have  destroyed  them.  But  when  dark  things 
come  from  the  houseless  hills,  or  creep  from  sunless  woods, 
they  fly  from  us.  What  roads  would  any  dare  to  tread,  what 
safety  would  there  be  in  quiet  lands,  or  in  the  homes  of  simple 
men  at  night,  if  the  Dunedain  were  asleep,  or  were  all  gone 
into  the  grave? 

‘And  yet  less  thanks  have  we  than  you.  Travellers  scowl  at 
us,  and  countrymen  give  us  scornful  names.  “Strider”  I  am 
to  one  fat  man  who  lives  within  a  day’s  march  of  foes  that 
would  freeze  his  heart,  or  lay  his  little  town  in  ruin,  if  he  were 
not  guarded  ceaselessly.  Yet  we  would  not  have  it  otherwise. 


324  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

If  simple  folk  are  free  from  care  and  fear,  simple  they  will  be, 
and  we  must  be  secret  to  keep  them  so.  That  has  been  the 
task  of  my  kindred,  while  the  years  have  lengthened  and  the 
grass  has  grown. 

‘But  now  the  world  is  changing  once  again.  A  new  hour 
comes.  Isildur’s  Bane  is  found.  Battle  is  at  hand.  The  Sword 
shall  be  reforged.  I  will  come  to  Minas  Tirith.’ 

‘Isildur’s  Bane  is  found,  you  say,’  said  Boromir.  ‘I  have 
seen  a  bright  ring  in  the  Halfling’s  hand;  but  Isildur  perished 
ere  this  age  of  the  world  began,  they  say.  How  do  the  Wise 
know  that  this  ring  is  his?  And  how  has  it  passed  down  the 
years,  until  it  is  brought  hither  by  so  strange  a  messenger?’ 

‘That  shall  be  told,’  said  Elrond. 

‘But  not  yet,  I  beg,  Master!’  cried  Bilbo.  ‘Already  the  Sun 
is  climbing  to  noon,  and  I  feel  the  need  of  something  to 
strengthen  me.’ 

‘I  had  not  named  you,’  said  Elrond  smiling.  ‘But  I  do  so 
now.  Come!  Tell  us  your  tale.  And  if  you  have  not  yet  cast 
your  story  into  verse,  you  may  tell  it  in  plain  words.  The 
briefer,  the  sooner  shall  you  be  refreshed.’ 

‘Very  well,’  said  Bilbo.  ‘I  will  do  as  you  bid.  But  I  will  now 
tell  the  true  story,  and  if  some  here  have  heard  me  tell  it 
otherwise’  -  he  looked  sidelong  at  Gloin  -  ‘I  ask  them  to 
forget  it  and  forgive  me.  I  only  wished  to  claim  the  treasure 
as  my  very  own  in  those  days,  and  to  be  rid  of  the  name  of 
thief  that  was  put  on  me.  But  perhaps  I  understand  things  a 
little  better  now.  Anyway,  this  is  what  happened.’ 

To  some  there  Bilbo’s  tale  was  wholly  new,  and  they 
listened  with  amazement  while  the  old  hobbit,  actually  not  at 
all  displeased,  recounted  his  adventure  with  Gollum,  at  full 
length.  He  did  not  omit  a  single  riddle.  He  would  have  given 
also  an  account  of  his  party  and  disappearance  from  the 
Shire,  if  he  had  been  allowed;  but  Elrond  raised  his  hand. 

‘Well  told,  my  friend,’  he  said,  ‘but  that  is  enough  at  this 
time.  For  the  moment  it  suffices  to  know  that  the  Ring  passed 
to  Frodo,  your  heir.  Let  him  now  speak!’ 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


325 


Then,  less  willingly  than  Bilbo,  Frodo  told  of  all  his  deal¬ 
ings  with  the  Ring  from  the  day  that  it  passed  into  his  keeping. 
Every  step  of  his  journey  from  Hobbiton  to  the  Ford  of 
Bruinen  was  questioned  and  considered,  and  everything  that 
he  could  recall  concerning  the  Black  Riders  was  examined. 
At  last  he  sat  down  again. 

‘Not  bad,’  Bilbo  said  to  him.  ‘You  would  have  made  a 
good  story  of  it,  if  they  hadn’t  kept  on  interrupting.  I  tried  to 
make  a  few  notes,  but  we  shall  have  to  go  over  it  all  again 
together  some  time,  if  I  am  to  write  it  up.  There  are  whole 
chapters  of  stuff  before  you  ever  got  here!’ 

‘Yes,  it  made  quite  a  long  tale,’  answered  Frodo.  ‘But  the 
story  still  does  not  seem  complete  to  me.  I  still  want  to  know 
a  good  deal,  especially  about  Gandalf.’ 

Galdor  of  the  Havens,  who  sat  nearby,  overheard  him. 
‘You  speak  for  me  also,’  he  cried,  and  turning  to  Elrond  he 
said:  ‘The  Wise  may  have  good  reason  to  believe  that  the 
halfling’s  trove  is  indeed  the  Great  Ring  of  long  debate, 
unlikely  though  that  may  seem  to  those  who  know  less.  But 
may  we  not  hear  the  proofs?  And  I  would  ask  this  also.  What 
of  Saruman?  He  is  learned  in  the  lore  of  the  Rings,  yet  he  is 
not  among  us.  What  is  his  counsel  -  if  he  knows  the  things 
that  we  have  heard?’ 

‘The  questions  that  you  ask,  Galdor,  are  bound  together,’ 
said  Elrond.  ‘I  had  not  overlooked  them,  and  they  shall  be 
answered.  But  these  things  it  is  the  part  of  Gandalf  to  make 
clear;  and  I  call  upon  him  last,  for  it  is  the  place  of  honour, 
and  in  all  this  matter  he  has  been  the  chief.’ 

‘Some,  Galdor,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘would  think  the  tidings  of 
Gloin,  and  the  pursuit  of  Frodo,  proof  enough  that  the 
halfling’s  trove  is  a  thing  of  great  worth  to  the  Enemy.  Yet  it 
is  a  ring.  What  then?  The  Nine  the  Nazgul  keep.  The  Seven 
are  taken  or  destroyed.’  At  this  Gloin  stirred,  but  did  not 
speak.  ‘The  Three  we  know  of.  What  then  is  this  one  that  he 
desires  so  much? 

‘There  is  indeed  a  wide  waste  of  time  between  the  River 


326 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


and  the  Mountain,  between  the  loss  and  the  finding.  But  the 
gap  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Wise  has  been  filled  at  last.  Yet 
too  slowly.  For  the  Enemy  has  been  close  behind,  closer  even 
than  I  feared.  And  well  is  it  that  not  until  this  year,  this  very 
summer,  as  it  seems,  did  he  learn  the  full  truth. 

‘Some  here  will  remember  that  many  years  ago  I  myself 
dared  to  pass  the  doors  of  the  Necromancer  in  Dol  Guldur, 
and  secretly  explored  his  ways,  and  found  thus  that  our  fears 
were  true:  he  was  none  other  than  Sauron,  our  Enemy  of 
old,  at  length  taking  shape  and  power  again.  Some,  too,  will 
remember  also  that  Saruman  dissuaded  us  from  open  deeds 
against  him,  and  for  long  we  watched  him  only.  Yet  at  last, 
as  his  shadow  grew,  Saruman  yielded,  and  the  Council  put 
forth  its  strength  and  drove  the  evil  out  of  Mirkwood  -  and 
that  was  in  the  very  year  of  the  finding  of  this  Ring:  a  strange 
chance,  if  chance  it  was. 

‘But  we  were  too  late,  as  Elrond  foresaw.  Sauron  also  had 
watched  us,  and  had  long  prepared  against  our  stroke,  gov¬ 
erning  Mordor  from  afar  through  Minas  Morgul,  where  his 
Nine  servants  dwelt,  until  all  was  ready.  Then  he  gave  way 
before  us,  but  only  feigned  to  flee,  and  soon  after  came  to 
the  Dark  Tower  and  openly  declared  himself.  Then  for  the 
last  time  the  Council  met;  for  now  we  learned  that  he  was 
seeking  ever  more  eagerly  for  the  One.  We  feared  then  that 
he  had  some  news  of  it  that  we  knew  nothing  of.  But  Saruman 
said  nay,  and  repeated  what  he  had  said  to  us  before:  that 
the  One  would  never  again  be  found  in  Middle-earth. 

‘  “At  the  worst,”  said  he,  “our  Enemy  knows  that  we  have 
it  not,  and  that  it  still  is  lost.  But  what  was  lost  may  yet  be 
found,  he  thinks.  Fear  not!  Elis  hope  will  cheat  him.  Have  I 
not  earnestly  studied  this  matter?  Into  Anduin  the  Great  it 
fell;  and  long  ago,  while  Sauron  slept,  it  was  rolled  down  the 
River  to  the  Sea.  There  let  it  lie  until  the  End.”  ’ 

Gandalf  fell  silent,  gazing  eastward  from  the  porch  to  the 
far  peaks  of  the  Misty  Mountains,  at  whose  great  roots  the 
peril  of  the  world  had  so  long  lain  hidden.  He  sighed. 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


327 


‘There  I  was  at  fault,’  he  said.  ‘I  was  lulled  by  the  words 
of  Saruman  the  Wise;  but  I  should  have  sought  for  the  truth 
sooner,  and  our  peril  would  now  be  less.’ 

We  were  all  at  fault,’  said  Elrond,  ‘and  but  for  your  vigil¬ 
ance  the  Darkness,  maybe,  would  already  be  upon  us.  But 
say  on!’ 

‘From  the  first  my  heart  misgave  me,  against  all  reason 
that  I  knew,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘and  I  desired  to  know  how  this 
thing  came  to  Gollum,  and  how  long  he  had  possessed  it.  So 
I  set  a  watch  for  him,  guessing  that  he  would  ere  long  come 
forth  from  his  darkness  to  seek  for  his  treasure.  He  came,  but 
he  escaped  and  was  not  found.  And  then  alas!  I  let  the  matter 
rest,  watching  and  waiting  only,  as  we  have  too  often  done. 

‘Time  passed  with  many  cares,  until  my  doubts  were  awak¬ 
ened  again  to  sudden  fear.  Whence  came  the  hobbit’s  ring? 
What,  if  my  fear  was  true,  should  be  done  with  it?  Those 
things  I  must  decide.  But  I  spoke  yet  of  my  dread  to  none, 
knowing  the  peril  of  an  untimely  whisper,  if  it  went  astray. 
In  all  the  long  wars  with  the  Dark  Tower  treason  has  ever 
been  our  greatest  foe. 

‘That  was  seventeen  years  ago.  Soon  I  became  aware  that 
spies  of  many  sorts,  even  beasts  and  birds,  were  gathered 
round  the  Shire,  and  my  fear  grew.  I  called  for  the  help  of 
the  Dunedain,  and  their  watch  was  doubled;  and  I  opened 
my  heart  to  Aragorn,  the  heir  of  Isildur.’ 

‘And  I,’  said  Aragorn,  ‘counselled  that  we  should  hunt  for 
Gollum,  too  late  though  it  may  seem.  And  since  it  seemed  fit 
that  Isildur’s  heir  should  labour  to  repair  Isildur’s  fault,  I 
went  with  Gandalf  on  the  long  and  hopeless  search.’ 

Then  Gandalf  told  how  they  had  explored  the  whole  length 
of  Wilderland,  down  even  to  the  Mountains  of  Shadow  and 
the  fences  of  Mordor.  ‘There  we  had  rumour  of  him,  and  we 
guess  that  he  dwelt  there  long  in  the  dark  hills;  but  we  never 
found  him,  and  at  last  I  despaired.  And  then  in  my  despair  I 
thought  again  of  a  test  that  might  make  the  finding  of  Gollum 
unneeded.  The  ring  itself  might  tell  if  it  were  the  One.  The 
memory  of  words  at  the  Council  came  back  to  me:  words  of 


328 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Saruman,  half-heeded  at  the  time.  I  heard  them  now  clearly 
in  my  heart. 

‘  “The  Nine,  the  Seven,  and  the  Three,”  he  said,  “had  each 
their  proper  gem.  Not  so  the  One.  It  was  round  and 
unadorned,  as  it  were  one  of  the  lesser  rings;  but  its  maker  set 
marks  upon  it  that  the  skilled,  maybe,  could  still  see  and  read.” 

‘What  those  marks  were  he  had  not  said.  Who  now  would 
know?  The  maker.  And  Saruman?  But  great  though  his  lore 
may  be,  it  must  have  a  source.  What  hand  save  Sauron’s  ever 
held  this  thing,  ere  it  was  lost?  The  hand  of  Isildur  alone. 

With  that  thought,  I  forsook  the  chase,  and  passed  swiftly 
to  Gondor.  In  former  days  the  members  of  my  order  had 
been  well  received  there,  but  Saruman  most  of  all.  Often  he 
had  been  for  long  the  guest  of  the  Lords  of  the  City.  Less 
welcome  did  the  Lord  Denethor  show  me  then  than  of  old, 
and  grudgingly  he  permitted  me  to  search  among  his  hoarded 
scrolls  and  books. 

‘  “If  indeed  you  look  only,  as  you  say,  for  records  of  ancient 
days,  and  the  beginnings  of  the  City,  read  on!”  he  said.  “For 
to  me  what  was  is  less  dark  than  what  is  to  come,  and  that  is 
my  care.  But  unless  you  have  more  skill  even  than  Saruman, 
who  has  studied  here  long,  you  will  find  naught  that  is  not 
well  known  to  me,  who  am  master  of  the  lore  of  this  City.” 

‘So  said  Denethor.  And  yet  there  lie  in  his  hoards  many 
records  that  few  even  of  the  lore-masters  now  can  read,  for 
their  scripts  and  tongues  have  become  dark  to  later  men.  And 
Boromir,  there  lies  in  Minas  Tirith  still,  unread,  I  guess,  by 
any  save  Saruman  and  myself  since  the  kings  failed,  a  scroll 
that  Isildur  made  himself.  For  Isildur  did  not  march  away 
straight  from  the  war  in  Mordor,  as  some  have  told  the  tale.’ 

‘Some  in  the  North,  maybe,’  Boromir  broke  in.  ‘All  know 
in  Gondor  that  he  went  first  to  Minas  Anor  and  dwelt  a 
while  with  his  nephew  Meneldil,  instructing  him,  before  he 
committed  to  him  the  rule  of  the  South  Kingdom.  In  that 
time  he  planted  there  the  last  sapling  of  the  White  Tree  in 
memory  of  his  brother.’ 

‘But  in  that  time  also  he  made  this  scroll,’  said  Gandalf; 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


329 


‘and  that  is  not  remembered  in  Gondor,  it  would  seem.  For 
this  scroll  concerns  the  Ring,  and  thus  wrote  Isildur  therein: 

The  Great  Ring  shall  go  now  to  be  an  heirloom  of  the 
North  Kingdom;  but  records  of  it  shall  be  left  in  Gondor, 
where  also  dwell  the  heirs  ofElendil,  lest  a  time  come  when 
the  memory  of  these  great  matters  shall  grow  dim. 

‘And  after  these  words  Isildur  described  the  Ring,  such  as  he 
found  it. 

It  was  hot  when  I  first  took  it,  hot  as  a  glede,  and  my 
hand  was  scorched,  so  that  I  doubt  if  ever  again  I  shall  be 
free  of  the  pain  of  it.  Yet  even  as  I  write  it  is  cooled,  and  it 
seemeth  to  shrink,  though  it  loseth  neither  its  beauty  nor  its 
shape.  Already  the  writing  upon  it,  which  at  first  was  as 
clear  as  red  flame,  fadeth  and  is  now  only  barely  to  be 
read.  It  is  fashioned  in  an  elven-script  of  Eregion,  for  they 
have  no  letters  in  Mordor  for  such  subtle  work;  but  the 
language  is  unknown  to  me.  I  deem  it  to  be  a  tongue  of  the 
Black  Land,  since  it  is  fold  and  uncouth.  What  evil  it  saith 
I  do  not  know;  but  I  trace  here  a  copy  of  it,  lest  it  fade 
beyond  recall.  The  Ring  misseth,  maybe,  the  heat  of 
Sauron’s  hand,  which  was  black  and  yet  burned  like  fire, 
and  so  Gil-galad  was  destroyed;  and  maybe  were  the  gold 
made  hot  again,  the  writing  would  be  refreshed.  But  for 
my  part  I  will  risk  no  hurt  to  this  thing:  of  all  the  works  of 
Sauron  the  only  fair.  It  is  precious  to  me,  though  I  buy  it 
with  great  pain. 

‘When  I  read  these  words,  my  quest  was  ended.  For  the 
traced  writing  was  indeed  as  Isildur  guessed,  in  the  tongue 
of  Mordor  and  the  servants  of  the  Tower.  And  what  was  said 
therein  was  already  known.  For  in  the  day  that  Sauron  first 
put  on  the  One,  Celebrimbor,  maker  of  the  Three,  was  aware 
of  him,  and  from  afar  he  heard  him  speak  these  words,  and 
so  his  evil  purposes  were  revealed. 


330 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘At  once  I  took  my  leave  of  Denethor,  but  even  as  I  went 
northwards,  messages  came  to  me  out  of  Lorien  that  Aragorn 
had  passed  that  way,  and  that  he  had  found  the  creature 
called  Gollum.  Therefore  I  went  first  to  meet  him  and  hear 
his  tale.  Into  what  deadly  perils  he  had  gone  alone  I  dared 
not  guess.’ 

‘There  is  little  need  to  tell  of  them,’  said  Aragorn.  ‘If  a  man 
must  needs  walk  in  sight  of  the  Black  Gate,  or  tread  the 
deadly  flowers  of  Morgul  Vale,  then  perils  he  will  have.  I, 
too,  despaired  at  last,  and  I  began  my  homeward  journey. 
And  then,  by  fortune,  I  came  suddenly  on  what  I  sought:  the 
marks  of  soft  feet  beside  a  muddy  pool.  But  now  the  trail  was 
fresh  and  swift,  and  it  led  not  to  Mordor  but  away.  Along  the 
skirts  of  the  Dead  Marshes  I  followed  it,  and  then  I  had  him. 
Lurking  by  a  stagnant  mere,  peering  in  the  water  as  the  dark 
eve  fell,  I  caught  him,  Gollum.  He  was  covered  with  green 
slime.  He  will  never  love  me,  I  fear;  for  he  bit  me,  and  I  was 
not  gentle.  Nothing  more  did  I  ever  get  from  his  mouth  than 
the  marks  of  his  teeth.  I  deemed  it  the  worst  part  of  all  my 
journey,  the  road  back,  watching  him  day  and  night,  making 
him  walk  before  me  with  a  halter  on  his  neck,  gagged,  until 
he  was  tamed  by  lack  of  drink  and  food,  driving  him  ever 
towards  Mirkwood.  I  brought  him  there  at  last  and  gave  him 
to  the  Elves,  for  we  had  agreed  that  this  should  be  done;  and 
I  was  glad  to  be  rid  of  his  company,  for  he  stank.  For  my 
part  I  hope  never  to  look  upon  him  again;  but  Gandalf  came 
and  endured  long  speech  with  him.’ 

‘Yes,  long  and  weary,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘but  not  without 
profit.  For  one  thing,  the  tale  he  told  of  his  loss  agreed  with 
that  which  Bilbo  has  now  told  openly  for  the  first  time;  but 
that  mattered  little,  since  I  had  already  guessed  it.  But  I 
learned  then  first  that  Gollum’s  ring  came  out  of  the  Great 
River  nigh  to  the  Gladden  Fields.  And  I  learned  also  that  he 
had  possessed  it  long.  Many  fives  of  his  small  kind.  The 
power  of  the  ring  had  lengthened  his  years  far  beyond  their 
span;  but  that  power  only  the  Great  Rings  wield. 

‘And  if  that  is  not  proof  enough,  Galdor,  there  is  the  other 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


331 


test  that  I  spoke  of.  Upon  this  very  ring  which  you  have  here 
seen  held  aloft,  round  and  unadorned,  the  letters  that  Isildur 
reported  may  still  be  read,  if  one  has  the  strength  of  will  to 
set  the  golden  thing  in  the  fire  a  while.  That  I  have  done,  and 
this  I  have  read: 

Ash  nazg  diirhatuliik,  ash  nazg  gimbatul,  ash  nazg 
thrakatuluk  agh  burzum-ishi  krimpatul.  ’ 

The  change  in  the  wizard’s  voice  was  astounding.  Sud¬ 
denly  it  became  menacing,  powerful,  harsh  as  stone.  A 
shadow  seemed  to  pass  over  the  high  sun,  and  the  porch  for 
a  moment  grew  dark.  All  trembled,  and  the  Elves  stopped 
their  ears. 

‘Never  before  has  any  voice  dared  to  utter  words  of  that 
tongue  in  Imladris,  Gandalf  the  Grey,’  said  Elrond,  as  the 
shadow  passed  and  the  company  breathed  once  more. 

‘And  let  us  hope  that  none  will  ever  speak  it  here  again,’ 
answered  Gandalf.  ‘Nonetheless  I  do  not  ask  your  pardon, 
Master  Elrond.  For  if  that  tongue  is  not  soon  to  be  heard  in 
every  corner  of  the  West,  then  let  all  put  doubt  aside  that  this 
thing  is  indeed  what  the  Wise  have  declared:  the  treasure  of 
the  Enemy,  fraught  with  all  his  malice;  and  in  it  lies  a  great 
part  of  his  strength  of  old.  Out  of  the  Black  Years  come  the 
words  that  the  Smiths  of  Eregion  heard,  and  knew  that  they 
had  been  betrayed: 

One  Ring  to  rule  them  all,  One  Ring  to  find  them,  One  Ring 
to  bring  them  all  and  in  the  Darkness  bind  them. 

‘Know  also,  my  friends,  that  I  learned  more  yet  from 
Gollum.  He  was  loth  to  speak  and  his  tale  was  unclear,  but 
it  is  beyond  all  doubt  that  he  went  to  Mordor,  and  there  all 
that  he  knew  was  forced  from  him.  Thus  the  Enemy  knows 
now  that  the  One  is  found,  that  it  was  long  in  the  Shire;  and 
since  his  servants  have  pursued  it  almost  to  our  door,  he  soon 


332 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


will  know,  already  he  may  know,  even  as  I  speak,  that  we 
have  it  here.’ 

All  sat  silent  for  a  while,  until  at  length  Boromir  spoke.  ‘He 
is  a  small  thing,  you  say,  this  Gollum?  Small,  but  great  in 
mischief.  What  became  of  him?  To  what  doom  did  you  put 
him?’ 

‘He  is  in  prison,  but  no  worse,’  said  Aragorn.  ‘He  had 
suffered  much.  There  is  no  doubt  that  he  was  tormented, 
and  the  fear  of  Sauron  lies  black  on  his  heart.  Still  I  for 
one  am  glad  that  he  is  safely  kept  by  the  watchful  Elves  of 
Mirkwood.  His  malice  is  great  and  gives  him  a  strength  hardly 
to  be  believed  in  one  so  lean  and  withered.  He  could  work 
much  mischief  still,  if  he  were  free.  And  I  do  not  doubt  that 
he  was  allowed  to  leave  Mordor  on  some  evil  errand.’ 

‘Alas!  alas!’  cried  Legolas,  and  in  his  fair  Elvish  face  there 
was  great  distress.  ‘The  tidings  that  I  was  sent  to  bring  must 
now  be  told.  They  are  not  good,  but  only  here  have  I  learned 
how  evil  they  may  seem  to  this  company.  Smeagol,  who  is 
now  called  Gollum,  has  escaped.’ 

‘Escaped?’  cried  Aragorn.  ‘That  is  ill  news  indeed.  We 
shall  all  rue  it  bitterly,  I  fear.  How  came  the  folk  of  Thranduil 
to  fail  in  their  trust?’ 

‘Not  through  lack  of  watchfulness,’  said  Legolas;  ‘but  per¬ 
haps  through  over-kindliness.  And  we  fear  that  the  prisoner 
had  aid  from  others,  and  that  more  is  known  of  our  doings 
than  we  could  wish.  We  guarded  this  creature  day  and  night, 
at  Gandalf ’s  bidding,  much  though  we  wearied  of  the  task. 
But  Gandalf  bade  us  hope  still  for  his  cure,  and  we  had  not 
the  heart  to  keep  him  ever  in  dungeons  under  the  earth, 
where  he  would  fall  back  into  his  old  black  thoughts.’ 

‘You  were  less  tender  to  me,’  said  Gloin  with  a  flash  of  his 
eyes,  as  old  memories  were  stirred  of  his  imprisonment  in 
the  deep  places  of  the  Elven-king’s  halls. 

‘Now  come!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘Pray,  do  not  interrupt,  my 
good  Gloin.  That  was  a  regrettable  misunderstanding,  long 
set  right.  If  all  the  grievances  that  stand  between  Elves  and 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND  333 

Dwarves  are  to  be  brought  up  here,  we  may  as  well  abandon 
this  Council.’ 

Gloin  rose  and  bowed,  and  Legolas  continued.  ‘In  the  days 
of  fair  weather  we  led  Gollum  through  the  woods;  and  there 
was  a  high  tree  standing  alone  far  from  the  others  which  he 
liked  to  climb.  Often  we  let  him  mount  up  to  the  highest 
branches,  until  he  felt  the  free  wind;  but  we  set  a  guard  at 
the  tree’s  foot.  One  day  he  refused  to  come  down,  and  the 
guards  had  no  mind  to  climb  after  him:  he  had  learned  the 
trick  of  clinging  to  boughs  with  his  feet  as  well  as  with  his 
hands;  so  they  sat  by  the  tree  far  into  the  night. 

‘It  was  that  very  night  of  summer,  yet  moonless  and  star¬ 
less,  that  Ores  came  on  us  at  unawares.  We  drove  them  off 
after  some  time;  they  were  many  and  fierce,  but  they  came 
from  over  the  mountains,  and  were  unused  to  the  woods. 
When  the  battle  was  over,  we  found  that  Gollum  was  gone, 
and  his  guards  were  slain  or  taken.  It  then  seemed  plain  to  us 
that  the  attack  had  been  made  for  his  rescue,  and  that  he  knew 
of  it  beforehand.  How  that  was  contrived  we  cannot  guess;  but 
Gollum  is  cunning,  and  the  spies  of  the  Enemy  are  many.  The 
dark  things  that  were  driven  out  in  the  year  of  the  Dragon’s  fall 
have  returned  in  greater  numbers,  and  Mirkwood  is  again  an 
evil  place,  save  where  our  realm  is  maintained. 

We  have  failed  to  recapture  Gollum.  We  came  on  his  trail 
among  those  of  many  Ores,  and  it  plunged  deep  into  the 
Forest,  going  south.  But  ere  long  it  escaped  our  skill,  and  we 
dared  not  continue  the  hunt;  for  we  were  drawing  nigh  to  Dol 
Guldur,  and  that  is  still  a  very  evil  place;  we  do  not  go  that  way.  ’ 

Well,  well,  he  is  gone,’  said  Gandalf.  We  have  no  time  to 
seek  for  him  again.  He  must  do  what  he  will.  But  he  may 
play  a  part  yet  that  neither  he  nor  Sauron  have  foreseen. 

‘And  now  I  will  answer  Galdor’s  other  questions.  What  of 
Saruman?  What  are  his  counsels  to  us  in  this  need?  This  tale 
I  must  tell  in  full,  for  only  Elrond  has  heard  it  yet,  and  that 
in  brief;  but  it  will  bear  on  all  that  we  must  resolve.  It  is  the 
last  chapter  in  the  Tale  of  the  Ring,  so  far  as  it  has  yet  gone. 


334 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘At  the  end  of  June  I  was  in  the  Shire,  but  a  cloud  of  anxiety 
was  on  my  mind,  and  I  rode  to  the  southern  borders  of  the 
little  land;  for  I  had  a  foreboding  of  some  danger,  still  hidden 
from  me  but  drawing  near.  There  messages  reached  me  tell¬ 
ing  me  of  war  and  defeat  in  Gondor,  and  when  I  heard  of 
the  Black  Shadow  a  chill  smote  my  heart.  But  I  found  nothing 
save  a  few  fugitives  from  the  South;  yet  it  seemed  to  me  that 
on  them  sat  a  fear  of  which  they  would  not  speak.  I  turned 
then  east  and  north  and  journeyed  along  the  Greenway;  and 
not  far  from  Bree  I  came  upon  a  traveller  sitting  on  a  bank 
beside  the  road  with  his  grazing  horse  beside  him.  It  was 
Radagast  the  Brown,  who  at  one  time  dwelt  at  Rhosgobel, 
near  the  borders  of  Mirkwood.  He  is  one  of  my  order,  but  I 
had  not  seen  him  for  many  a  year. 

‘“Gandalf!”  he  cried.  “I  was  seeking  you.  But  I  am  a 
stranger  in  these  parts.  All  I  knew  was  that  you  might  be 
found  in  a  wild  region  with  the  uncouth  name  of  Shire.” 

‘  “Your  information  was  correct,”  I  said.  “But  do  not  put 
it  that  way,  if  you  meet  any  of  the  inhabitants.  You  are  near 
the  borders  of  the  Shire  now.  And  what  do  you  want  with 
me?  It  must  be  pressing.  You  were  never  a  traveller,  unless 
driven  by  great  need.” 

‘“I  have  an  urgent  errand,”  he  said.  “My  news  is  evil.” 
Then  he  looked  about  him,  as  if  the  hedges  might  have  ears. 
“Nazgul,”  he  whispered.  “The  Nine  are  abroad  again.  They 
have  crossed  the  River  secretly  and  are  moving  westward. 
They  have  taken  the  guise  of  riders  in  black.” 

‘I  knew  then  what  I  had  dreaded  without  knowing  it. 

‘  “The  Enemy  must  have  some  great  need  or  purpose,” 
said  Radagast;  “but  what  it  is  that  makes  him  look  to  these 
distant  and  desolate  parts,  I  cannot  guess.” 

‘  “What  do  you  mean?”  said  I. 

‘  “I  have  been  told  that  wherever  they  go  the  Riders  ask  for 
news  of  a  land  called  Shire.” 

‘  “  The  Shire,”  I  said;  but  my  heart  sank.  For  even  the  Wise 
might  fear  to  withstand  the  Nine,  when  they  are  gathered 
together  under  their  fell  chieftain.  A  great  king  and  sorcerer 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND  335 

he  was  of  old,  and  now  he  wields  a  deadly  fear.  “Who  told 
you,  and  who  sent  you?”  I  asked. 

‘  “Saruman  the  White,”  answered  Radagast.  “And  he  told 
me  to  say  that  if  you  feel  the  need,  he  will  help;  but  you  must 
seek  his  aid  at  once,  or  it  will  be  too  late.” 

‘And  that  message  brought  me  hope.  For  Saruman  the 
White  is  the  greatest  of  my  order.  Radagast  is,  of  course,  a 
worthy  Wizard,  a  master  of  shapes  and  changes  of  hue;  and 
he  has  much  lore  of  herbs  and  beasts,  and  birds  are  especially 
his  friends.  But  Saruman  has  long  studied  the  arts  of  the 
Enemy  himself,  and  thus  we  have  often  been  able  to  forestall 
him.  It  was  by  the  devices  of  Saruman  that  we  drove  him  from 
Dol  Guldur.  It  might  be  that  he  had  found  some  weapons  that 
would  drive  back  the  Nine. 

‘  “I  will  go  to  Saruman,”  I  said. 

‘  “Then  you  must  go  now,”  said  Radagast;  “for  I  have 
wasted  time  in  looking  for  you,  and  the  days  are  running 
short.  I  was  told  to  find  you  before  Midsummer,  and  that  is 
now  here.  Even  if  you  set  out  from  this  spot,  you  will  hardly 
reach  him  before  the  Nine  discover  the  land  that  they  seek.  I 
myself  shall  turn  back  at  once.”  And  with  that  he  mounted 
and  would  have  ridden  straight  off. 

‘  “Stay  a  moment!”  I  said.  “We  shall  need  your  help,  and 
the  help  of  all  things  that  will  give  it.  Send  out  messages  to 
all  the  beasts  and  birds  that  are  your  friends.  Tell  them  to 
bring  news  of  anything  that  bears  on  this  matter  to  Saruman 
and  Gandalf.  Let  messages  be  sent  to  Orthanc.” 

‘  “I  will  do  that,”  he  said,  and  rode  off  as  if  the  Nine  were 
after  him. 

‘I  could  not  follow  him  then  and  there.  I  had  ridden  very 
far  already  that  day,  and  I  was  as  weary  as  my  horse;  and  I 
needed  to  consider  matters.  I  stayed  the  night  in  Bree,  and 
decided  that  I  had  no  time  to  return  to  the  Shire.  Never  did 
I  make  a  greater  mistake! 

‘However,  I  wrote  a  message  to  Frodo,  and  trusted  to  my 
friend  the  innkeeper  to  send  it  to  him.  I  rode  away  at  dawn; 


336 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


and  I  came  at  long  last  to  the  dwelling  of  Saruman.  That  is 
far  south  in  Isengard,  in  the  end  of  the  Misty  Mountains,  not 
far  from  the  Gap  of  Rohan.  And  Boromir  will  tell  you  that 
that  is  a  great  open  vale  that  lies  between  the  Misty  Mountains 
and  the  northmost  foothills  of  Ered  Nimrais,  the  White 
Mountains  of  his  home.  But  Isengard  is  a  circle  of  sheer  rocks 
that  enclose  a  valley  as  with  a  wall,  and  in  the  midst  of  that 
valley  is  a  tower  of  stone  called  Orthanc.  It  was  not  made  by 
Saruman,  but  by  the  Men  of  Numenor  long  ago;  and  it  is 
very  tall  and  has  many  secrets;  yet  it  looks  not  to  be  a  work 
of  craft.  It  cannot  be  reached  save  by  passing  the  circle  of 
Isengard;  and  in  that  circle  there  is  only  one  gate. 

‘Late  one  evening  I  came  to  the  gate,  like  a  great  arch  in 
the  wall  of  rock;  and  it  was  strongly  guarded.  But  the  keepers 
of  the  gate  were  on  the  watch  for  me  and  told  me  that 
Saruman  awaited  me.  I  rode  under  the  arch,  and  the  gate 
closed  silently  behind  me,  and  suddenly  I  was  afraid,  though 
I  knew  no  reason  for  it. 

‘But  I  rode  to  the  foot  of  Orthanc,  and  came  to  the  stair  of 
Saruman;  and  there  he  met  me  and  led  me  up  to  his  high 
chamber.  He  wore  a  ring  on  his  finger. 

‘  “So  you  have  come,  Gandalf,”  he  said  to  me  gravely;  but 
in  his  eyes  there  seemed  to  be  a  white  light,  as  if  a  cold 
laughter  was  in  his  heart. 

‘  “Yes,  I  have  come,”  I  said.  “I  have  come  for  your  aid, 
Saruman  the  White.”  And  that  title  seemed  to  anger  him. 

“‘Have  you  indeed,  Gandalf  the  Grey!”  he  scoffed.  “For 
aid?  It  has  seldom  been  heard  of  that  Gandalf  the  Grey  sought 
for  aid,  one  so  cunning  and  so  wise,  wandering  about  the 
lands,  and  concerning  himself  in  every  business,  whether  it 
belongs  to  him  or  not.” 

‘I  looked  at  him  and  wondered.  “But  if  I  am  not  deceived,” 
said  I,  “things  are  now  moving  which  will  require  the  union 
of  all  our  strength.” 

‘  “That  may  be  so,”  he  said,  “but  the  thought  is  late  in 
coming  to  you.  How  long,  I  wonder,  have  you  concealed 
from  me,  the  head  of  the  Council,  a  matter  of  greatest  import? 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


337 


What  brings  you  now  from  your  lurking-place  in  the  Shire?” 

‘  “The  Nine  have  come  forth  again,”  I  answered.  “They 
have  crossed  the  River.  So  Radagast  said  to  me.” 

‘  “Radagast  the  Brown!”  laughed  Saruman,  and  he  no 
longer  concealed  his  scorn.  “Radagast  the  Bird-tamer!  Rada¬ 
gast  the  Simple!  Radagast  the  Fool!  Yet  he  had  just  the  wit 
to  play  the  part  that  I  set  him.  For  you  have  come,  and  that 
was  all  the  purpose  of  my  message.  And  here  you  will  stay, 
Gandalf  the  Grey,  and  rest  from  journeys.  For  I  am  Saruman 
the  Wise,  Saruman  Ring-maker,  Saruman  of  Many  Colours!” 

‘I  looked  then  and  saw  that  his  robes,  which  had  seemed 
white,  were  not  so,  but  were  woven  of  all  colours,  and  if  he 
moved  they  shimmered  and  changed  hue  so  that  the  eye  was 
bewildered. 

‘  “I  liked  white  better,”  I  said. 

“White!”  he  sneered.  “It  serves  as  a  beginning.  White 
cloth  may  be  dyed.  The  white  page  can  be  overwritten;  and 
the  white  light  can  be  broken.” 

‘  “In  which  case  it  is  no  longer  white,”  said  I.  “And  he  that 
breaks  a  thing  to  find  out  what  it  is  has  left  the  path  of 
wisdom.” 

‘  “You  need  not  speak  to  me  as  to  one  of  the  fools  that  you 
take  for  friends,”  said  he.  “I  have  not  brought  you  hither  to 
be  instructed  by  you,  but  to  give  you  a  choice.” 

‘He  drew  himself  up  then  and  began  to  declaim,  as  if  he 
were  malting  a  speech  long  rehearsed.  “The  Elder  Days  are 
gone.  The  Middle  Days  are  passing.  The  Younger  Days  are 
beginning.  The  time  of  the  Elves  is  over,  but  our  time  is  at 
hand:  the  world  of  Men,  which  we  must  rule.  But  we  must 
have  power,  power  to  order  all  things  as  we  will,  for  that  good 
which  only  the  Wise  can  see. 

‘  “And  listen,  Gandalf,  my  old  friend  and  helper!”  he  said, 
coming  near  and  speaking  now  in  a  softer  voice.  “I  said  we, 
for  we  it  may  be,  if  you  will  join  with  me.  A  new  Power  is 
rising.  Against  it  the  old  allies  and  policies  will  not  avail  us  at 
all.  There  is  no  hope  left  in  Elves  or  dying  Numenor.  This 
then  is  one  choice  before  you,  before  us.  We  may  join  with 


338 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


that  Power.  It  would  be  wise,  Gandalf.  There  is  hope  that 
way.  Its  victory  is  at  hand;  and  there  will  be  rich  reward  for 
those  that  aided  it.  As  the  Power  grows,  its  proved  friends 
will  also  grow;  and  the  Wise,  such  as  you  and  I,  may  with 
patience  come  at  last  to  direct  its  courses,  to  control  it.  We 
can  bide  our  time,  we  can  keep  our  thoughts  in  our  hearts, 
deploring  maybe  evils  done  by  the  way,  but  approving  the 
high  and  ultimate  purpose:  Knowledge,  Rule,  Order;  all  the 
things  that  we  have  so  far  striven  in  vain  to  accomplish, 
hindered  rather  than  helped  by  our  weak  or  idle  friends. 
There  need  not  be,  there  would  not  be,  any  real  change  in 
our  designs,  only  in  our  means.” 

‘  “Saruman,”  I  said,  “I  have  heard  speeches  of  this  kind 
before,  but  only  in  the  mouths  of  emissaries  sent  from 
Mordor  to  deceive  the  ignorant.  I  cannot  think  that  you 
brought  me  so  far  only  to  weary  my  ears.” 

‘He  looked  at  me  sidelong,  and  paused  a  while  considering. 
“Well,  I  see  that  this  wise  course  does  not  commend  itself 
to  you,”  he  said.  “Not  yet?  Not  if  some  better  way  can  be 
contrived?” 

‘He  came  and  laid  his  long  hand  on  my  arm.  “And  why 
not,  Gandalf?”  he  whispered.  “Why  not?  The  Ruling  Ring? 
If  we  could  command  that,  then  the  Power  would  pass  to  us. 
That  is  in  truth  why  I  brought  you  here.  For  I  have  many 
eyes  in  my  service,  and  I  believe  that  you  know  where  this 
precious  thing  now  lies.  Is  it  not  so?  Or  why  do  the  Nine  ask 
for  the  Shire,  and  what  is  your  business  there?”  As  he  said 
this  a  lust  which  he  could  not  conceal  shone  suddenly  in  his 
eyes. 

‘“Saruman,”  I  said,  standing  away  from  him,  “only  one 
hand  at  a  time  can  wield  the  One,  and  you  know  that  well, 
so  do  not  trouble  to  say  we\  But  I  would  not  give  it,  nay,  I 
would  not  give  even  news  of  it  to  you,  now  that  I  learn  your 
mind.  You  were  head  of  the  Council,  but  you  have  unmasked 
yourself  at  last.  Well,  the  choices  are,  it  seems,  to  submit  to 
Sauron,  or  to  yourself.  I  will  take  neither.  Have  you  others  to 
offer?” 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


339 


‘He  was  cold  now  and  perilous.  “Yes,”  he  said.  “I  did  not 
expect  you  to  show  wisdom,  even  in  your  own  behalf;  but 
I  gave  you  the  chance  of  aiding  me  willingly,  and  so  saving 
yourself  much  trouble  and  pain.  The  third  choice  is  to  stay 
here,  until  the  end.” 

‘  “Until  what  end?” 

‘  “Until  you  reveal  to  me  where  the  One  may  be  found.  I 
may  find  means  to  persuade  you.  Or  until  it  is  found  in  your 
despite,  and  the  Ruler  has  time  to  turn  to  lighter  matters:  to 
devise,  say,  a  fitting  reward  for  the  hindrance  and  insolence 
of  Gandalf  the  Grey.” 

‘  “That  may  not  prove  to  be  one  of  the  lighter  matters,” 
said  I.  He  laughed  at  me,  for  my  words  were  empty,  and  he 
knew  it. 

‘They  took  me  and  they  set  me  alone  on  the  pinnacle  of 
Orthanc,  in  the  place  where  Saruman  was  accustomed  to 
watch  the  stars.  There  is  no  descent  save  by  a  narrow  stair 
of  many  thousand  steps,  and  the  valley  below  seems  far  away. 
I  looked  on  it  and  saw  that,  whereas  it  had  once  been  green 
and  fair,  it  was  now  filled  with  pits  and  forges.  Wolves  and 
ores  were  housed  in  Isengard,  for  Saruman  was  mustering  a 
great  force  on  his  own  account,  in  rivalry  of  Sauron  and  not 
in  his  service,  yet.  Over  all  his  works  a  dark  smoke  hung  and 
wrapped  itself  about  the  sides  of  Orthanc.  I  stood  alone  on 
an  island  in  the  clouds;  and  I  had  no  chance  of  escape,  and 
my  days  were  bitter.  I  was  pierced  with  cold,  and  I  had  but 
little  room  in  which  to  pace  to  and  fro,  brooding  on  the 
coming  of  the  Riders  to  the  North. 

‘That  the  Nine  had  indeed  arisen  I  felt  assured,  apart  from 
the  words  of  Saruman  which  might  be  lies.  Long  ere  I  came 
to  Isengard  I  had  heard  tidings  by  the  way  that  could  not  be 
mistaken.  Fear  was  ever  in  my  heart  for  my  friends  in  the 
Shire;  but  still  I  had  some  hope.  I  hoped  that  Frodo  had  set 
forth  at  once,  as  my  letter  had  urged,  and  that  he  had  reached 
Rivendell  before  the  deadly  pursuit  began.  And  both  my  fear 
and  my  hope  proved  ill-founded.  For  my  hope  was  founded 


340 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


on  a  fat  man  in  Brce;  and  my  fear  was  founded  on  the 
cunning  of  Sauron.  But  fat  men  who  sell  ale  have  many  calls 
to  answer;  and  the  power  of  Sauron  is  still  less  than  fear 
makes  it.  But  in  the  circle  of  Isengard,  trapped  and  alone,  it 
was  not  easy  to  think  that  the  hunters  before  whom  all  have 
fled  or  fallen  would  falter  in  the  Shire  far  away.’ 

‘I  saw  you!’  cried  Frodo.  ‘You  were  walking  backwards 
and  forwards.  The  moon  shone  in  your  hair.’ 

Gandalf  paused  astonished  and  looked  at  him.  ‘It  was  only 
a  dream,’  said  Frodo,  ‘but  it  suddenly  came  back  to  me.  I 
had  quite  forgotten  it.  It  came  some  time  ago;  after  I  left  the 
Shire,  I  think.’ 

‘Then  it  was  late  in  coming,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘as  you  will  see. 
I  was  in  an  evil  plight.  And  those  who  know  me  will  agree 
that  I  have  seldom  been  in  such  need,  and  do  not  bear  such 
misfortune  well.  Gandalf  the  Grey  caught  like  a  fly  in  a  spi¬ 
der’s  treacherous  web!  Yet  even  the  most  subtle  spiders  may 
leave  a  weak  thread. 

‘At  first  I  feared,  as  Saruman  no  doubt  intended,  that  Rada- 
gast  had  also  fallen.  Yet  I  had  caught  no  hint  of  anything 
wrong  in  his  voice  or  in  his  eye  at  our  meeting.  If  I  had,  I 
should  never  have  gone  to  Isengard,  or  I  should  have  gone 
more  warily.  So  Saruman  guessed,  and  he  had  concealed 
his  mind  and  deceived  his  messenger.  It  would  have  been 
useless  in  any  case  to  try  and  win  over  the  honest  Radagast 
to  treachery.  He  sought  me  in  good  faith,  and  so  persuaded 
me. 

‘That  was  the  undoing  of  Saruman’s  plot.  For  Radagast 
knew  no  reason  why  he  should  not  do  as  I  asked;  and  he  rode 
away  towards  Mirkwood  where  he  had  many  friends  of  old. 
And  the  Eagles  of  the  Mountains  went  far  and  wide,  and  they 
saw  many  things:  the  gathering  of  wolves  and  the  mustering 
of  Ores;  and  the  Nine  Riders  going  hither  and  thither  in  the 
lands;  and  they  heard  news  of  the  escape  of  Gollum.  And 
they  sent  a  messenger  to  bring  these  tidings  to  me. 

‘So  it  was  that  when  summer  waned,  there  came  a  night 
of  moon,  and  Gwaihir  the  Windlord,  swiftest  of  the  Great 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


341 


Eagles,  came  unlooked-for  to  Orthanc;  and  he  found  me 
standing  on  the  pinnacle.  Then  I  spoke  to  him  and  he  bore 
me  away,  before  Saruman  was  aware.  I  was  far  from  Isengard, 
ere  the  wolves  and  ores  issued  from  the  gate  to  pursue  me. 

‘  “How  far  can  you  bear  me?”  I  said  to  Gwaihir. 

‘  “Many  leagues,”  said  he,  “but  not  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth.  I  was  sent  to  bear  tidings  not  burdens.” 

‘  “Then  I  must  have  a  steed  on  land,”  I  said,  “and  a  steed 
surpassingly  swift,  for  I  have  never  had  such  need  of  haste 
before.” 

‘  “Then  I  will  bear  you  to  Edoras,  where  the  Lord  of  Rohan 
sits  in  his  halls,”  he  said;  “for  that  is  not  very  far  off.”  And  I 
was  glad,  for  in  the  Riddermark  of  Rohan  the  Rohirrim,  the 
Horse-lords,  dwell,  and  there  are  no  horses  like  those  that  are 
bred  in  that  great  vale  between  the  Misty  Mountains  and  the 
White. 

‘  “Are  the  Men  of  Rohan  still  to  be  trusted,  do  you  think?” 
I  said  to  Gwaihir,  for  the  treason  of  Saruman  had  shaken  my 
faith. 

‘  “They  pay  a  tribute  of  horses,”  he  answered,  “and  send 
many  yearly  to  Mordor,  or  so  it  is  said;  but  they  are  not  yet 
under  the  yoke.  But  if  Saruman  has  become  evil,  as  you  say, 
then  their  doom  cannot  be  long  delayed.” 

‘He  set  me  down  in  the  land  of  Rohan  ere  dawn;  and  now 
I  have  lengthened  my  tale  over  long.  The  rest  must  be  more 
brief.  In  Rohan  I  found  evil  already  at  work:  the  lies  of 
Saruman;  and  the  king  of  the  land  would  not  listen  to  my 
warnings.  He  bade  me  take  a  horse  and  be  gone;  and  I  chose 
one  much  to  my  liking,  but  little  to  his.  I  took  the  best  horse 
in  his  land,  and  I  have  never  seen  the  like  of  him.’ 

‘Then  he  must  be  a  noble  beast  indeed,’  said  Aragorn;  ‘and 
it  grieves  me  more  than  many  tidings  that  might  seem  worse 
to  learn  that  Sauron  levies  such  tribute.  It  was  not  so  when 
last  I  was  in  that  land.’ 

‘Nor  is  it  now,  I  will  swear,’  said  Boromir.  ‘It  is  a  lie  that 
comes  from  the  Enemy.  I  know  the  Men  of  Rohan,  true  and 


342 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


valiant,  our  allies,  dwelling  still  in  the  lands  that  we  gave  them 
long  ago.’ 

‘The  shadow  of  Mordor  lies  on  distant  lands,’  answered 
Aragorn.  ‘Saruman  has  fallen  under  it.  Rohan  is  beset.  Who 
knows  what  you  will  find  there,  if  ever  you  return?’ 

‘Not  this  at  least,’  said  Boromir,  ‘that  they  will  buy  their 
lives  with  horses.  They  love  their  horses  next  to  their  kin. 
And  not  without  reason,  for  the  horses  of  the  Riddermark 
come  from  the  fields  of  the  North,  far  from  the  Shadow,  and 
their  race,  as  that  of  their  masters,  is  descended  from  the  free 
days  of  old.’ 

‘True  indeed!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘And  there  is  one  among  them 
that  might  have  been  foaled  in  the  morning  of  the  world.  The 
horses  of  the  Nine  cannot  vie  with  him;  tireless,  swift  as  the 
flowing  wind.  Shadowfax  they  called  him.  By  day  his  coat 
glistens  like  silver;  and  by  night  it  is  like  a  shade,  and  he 
passes  unseen.  Light  is  his  footfall!  Never  before  had  any 
man  mounted  him,  but  I  took  him  and  I  tamed  him,  and  so 
speedily  he  bore  me  that  I  reached  the  Shire  when  Frodo  was 
on  the  Barrow-downs,  though  I  set  out  from  Rohan  only 
when  he  set  out  from  Hobbiton. 

‘But  fear  grew  in  me  as  I  rode.  Ever  as  I  came  north  I 
heard  tidings  of  the  Riders,  and  though  I  gained  on  them  day 
by  day,  they  were  ever  before  me.  They  had  divided  their 
forces,  I  learned:  some  remained  on  the  eastern  borders,  not 
far  from  the  Greenway,  and  some  invaded  the  Shire  from  the 
south.  I  came  to  Hobbiton  and  Frodo  had  gone;  but  I  had 
words  with  old  Gamgee.  Many  words  and  few  to  the  point. 
He  had  much  to  say  about  the  shortcomings  of  the  new 
owners  of  Bag  End. 

‘  “I  can’t  abide  changes,”  said  he,  “not  at  my  time  of  life, 
and  least  of  all  changes  for  the  worst.”  “Changes  for  the 
worst,”  he  repeated  many  times. 

‘  “Worst  is  a  bad  word,”  I  said  to  him,  “and  I  hope  you  do 
not  live  to  see  it.”  But  amidst  his  talk  I  gathered  at  last  that 
Frodo  had  left  Hobbiton  less  than  a  week  before,  and  that  a 
black  horseman  had  come  to  the  Hill  the  same  evening.  Then 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


343 


I  rode  on  in  fear.  I  came  to  Buckland  and  found  it  in  uproar, 
as  busy  as  a  hive  of  ants  that  has  been  stirred  with  a  stick.  I 
came  to  the  house  at  Crickhollow,  and  it  was  broken  open 
and  empty;  but  on  the  threshold  there  lay  a  cloak  that  had 
been  Frodo’s.  Then  for  a  while  hope  left  me,  and  I  did  not 
wait  to  gather  news,  or  I  might  have  been  comforted;  but  I 
rode  on  the  trail  of  the  Riders.  It  was  hard  to  follow,  for  it 
went  many  ways,  and  I  was  at  a  loss.  But  it  seemed  to  me 
that  one  or  two  had  ridden  towards  Bree;  and  that  way  I  went, 
for  I  thought  of  words  that  might  be  said  to  the  innkeeper. 

‘  “Butterbur  they  call  him,”  thought  I.  “If  this  delay 
was  his  fault,  I  will  melt  all  the  butter  in  him.  I  will  roast  the 
old  fool  over  a  slow  fire.”  He  expected  no  less,  and  when 
he  saw  my  face  he  fell  down  flat  and  began  to  melt  on  the 
spot.’ 

‘What  did  you  do  to  him?’  cried  Frodo  in  alarm.  ‘He  was 
really  very  kind  to  us  and  did  all  that  he  could.’ 

Gandalf  laughed.  ‘Don’t  be  afraid!’  he  said.  ‘I  did  not  bite, 
and  I  barked  very  little.  So  overjoyed  was  I  by  the  news  that 
I  got  out  of  him,  when  he  stopped  quaking,  that  I  embraced 
the  old  fellow.  How  it  had  happened  I  could  not  then  guess, 
but  I  learned  that  you  had  been  in  Bree  the  night  before,  and 
had  gone  off  that  morning  with  Strider. 

‘  “Strider!”  I  cried,  shouting  for  joy. 

“‘Yes,  sir,  I  am  afraid  so,  sir,”  said  Butterbur,  mistaking 
me.  “He  got  at  them,  in  spite  of  all  that  I  could  do,  and  they 
took  up  with  him.  They  behaved  very  queer  all  the  time  they 
were  here:  wilful,  you  might  say.” 

‘  “Ass!  Fool!  Thrice  worthy  and  beloved  Barliman!”  said  I. 
“It’s  the  best  news  I  have  had  since  Midsummer;  it’s  worth 
a  gold  piece  at  the  least.  May  your  beer  be  laid  under  an 
enchantment  of  surpassing  excellence  for  seven  years!”  said 
I.  “Now  I  can  take  a  night’s  rest,  the  first  since  I  have  forgot¬ 
ten  when.” 

‘So  I  stayed  there  that  night,  wondering  much  what  had 
become  of  the  Riders;  for  only  of  two  had  there  yet  been  any 


344 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


news  in  Bree,  it  seemed.  But  in  the  night  we  heard  more. 
Five  at  least  came  from  the  west,  and  they  threw  down  the 
gates  and  passed  through  Bree  like  a  howling  wind;  and 
the  Bree-folk  are  still  shivering  and  expecting  the  end  of  the 
world.  I  got  up  before  dawn  and  went  after  them. 

‘I  do  not  know,  but  it  seems  clear  to  me  that  this  is  what 
happened.  Their  Captain  remained  in  secret  away  south  of 
Bree,  while  two  rode  ahead  through  the  village,  and  four 
more  invaded  the  Shire.  But  when  these  were  foiled  in  Bree 
and  at  Crickhollow,  they  returned  to  their  Captain  with  tid¬ 
ings,  and  so  left  the  Road  unguarded  for  a  while,  except  by 
their  spies.  The  Captain  then  sent  some  eastward  straight 
across  country,  and  he  himself  with  the  rest  rode  along  the 
Road  in  great  wrath. 

‘I  galloped  to  Weathertop  like  a  gale,  and  I  reached  it  before 
sundown  on  my  second  day  from  Bree  -  and  they  were  there 
before  me.  They  drew  away  from  me,  for  they  felt  the  coming 
of  my  anger  and  they  dared  not  face  it  while  the  Sun  was  in 
the  sky.  But  they  closed  round  at  night,  and  I  was  besieged 
on  the  hill-top,  in  the  old  ring  of  Amon  Sul.  I  was  hard  put 
to  it  indeed:  such  light  and  flame  cannot  have  been  seen  on 
Weathertop  since  the  war-beacons  of  old. 

‘At  sunrise  I  escaped  and  fled  towards  the  north.  I  could 
not  hope  to  do  more.  It  was  impossible  to  find  you,  Frodo, 
in  the  wilderness,  and  it  would  have  been  folly  to  try  with  all 
the  Nine  at  my  heels.  So  I  had  to  trust  to  Aragorn.  But  I 
hoped  to  draw  some  of  them  off,  and  yet  reach  Rivendell 
ahead  of  you  and  send  out  help.  Four  Riders  did  indeed 
follow  me,  but  they  turned  back  after  a  while  and  made  for 
the  Ford,  it  seems.  That  helped  a  little,  for  there  were  only 
five,  not  nine,  when  your  camp  was  attacked. 

‘I  reached  here  at  last  by  a  long  hard  road,  up  the  Hoarwell 
and  through  the  Ettenmoors,  and  down  from  the  north.  It 
took  me  nearly  fifteen  days  from  Weathertop,  for  I  could 
not  ride  among  the  rocks  of  the  troll-fells,  and  Shadowfax 
departed.  I  sent  him  back  to  his  master;  but  a  great  friendship 
has  grown  between  us,  and  if  I  have  need  he  will  come  at  my 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


345 


call.  But  so  it  was  that  I  came  to  Rivendell  only  two  days 
before  the  Ring,  and  news  of  its  peril  had  already  been 
brought  here  -  which  proved  well  indeed. 

‘And  that,  Frodo,  is  the  end  of  my  account.  May  Elrond 
and  the  others  forgive  the  length  of  it.  But  such  a  thing  has 
not  happened  before,  that  Gandalf  broke  tryst  and  did  not 
come  when  he  promised.  An  account  to  the  Ring-bearer  of 
so  strange  an  event  was  required,  I  think. 

‘Well,  the  Tale  is  now  told,  from  first  to  last.  Here  we  all 
are,  and  here  is  the  Ring.  But  we  have  not  yet  come  any 
nearer  to  our  purpose.  What  shall  we  do  with  it?’ 

There  was  a  silence.  At  last  Elrond  spoke  again. 

‘This  is  grievous  news  concerning  Saruman,’  he  said;  ‘for 
we  trusted  him  and  he  is  deep  in  all  our  counsels.  It  is  perilous 
to  study  too  deeply  the  arts  of  the  Enemy,  for  good  or  for  ill. 
But  such  falls  and  betrayals,  alas,  have  happened  before.  Of 
the  tales  that  we  have  heard  this  day  the  tale  of  Frodo  was 
most  strange  to  me.  I  have  known  few  hobbits,  save  Bilbo 
here;  and  it  seems  to  me  that  he  is  perhaps  not  so  alone  and 
singular  as  I  had  thought  him.  The  world  has  changed  much 
since  I  last  was  on  the  westward  roads. 

‘The  Barrow-wights  we  know  by  many  names;  and  of  the 
Old  Forest  many  tales  have  been  told:  all  that  now  remains 
is  but  an  outlier  of  its  northern  march.  Time  was  when  a 
squirrel  could  go  from  tree  to  tree  from  what  is  now  the  Shire 
to  Dunland  west  of  Isengard.  In  those  lands  I  journeyed  once, 
and  many  things  wild  and  strange  I  knew.  But  I  had  forgotten 
Bombadil,  if  indeed  this  is  still  the  same  that  walked  the 
woods  and  hills  long  ago,  and  even  then  was  older  than  the 
old.  That  was  not  then  his  name.  Iarwain  Ben-adar  we  called 
him,  oldest  and  fatherless.  But  many  another  name  he  has 
since  been  given  by  other  folk:  Forn  by  the  Dwarves,  Orald 
by  Northern  Men,  and  other  names  beside.  He  is  a  strange 
creature,  but  maybe  I  should  have  summoned  him  to  our 
Council.’ 

‘He  would  not  have  come,’  said  Gandalf. 


346 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Could  we  not  still  send  messages  to  him  and  obtain  his 
help?’  asked  Erestor.  ‘It  seems  that  he  has  a  power  even  over 
the  Ring.’ 

‘No,  I  should  not  put  it  so,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘Say  rather  that 
the  Ring  has  no  power  over  him.  He  is  his  own  master.  But 
he  cannot  alter  the  Ring  itself,  nor  break  its  power  over  others. 
And  now  he  is  withdrawn  into  a  little  land,  within  bounds 
that  he  has  set,  though  none  can  see  them,  waiting  perhaps 
for  a  change  of  days,  and  he  will  not  step  beyond  them.’ 

‘But  within  those  bounds  nothing  seems  to  dismay  him,’ 
said  Erestor.  ‘Would  he  not  take  the  Ring  and  keep  it  there, 
for  ever  harmless?’ 

‘No,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘not  willingly.  He  might  do  so,  if  all  the 
free  folk  of  the  world  begged  him,  but  he  would  not  under¬ 
stand  the  need.  And  if  he  were  given  the  Ring,  he  would  soon 
forget  it,  or  most  likely  throw  it  away.  Such  things  have  no 
hold  on  his  mind.  He  would  be  a  most  unsafe  guardian;  and 
that  alone  is  answer  enough.’ 

‘But  in  any  case,’  said  Glorfindel,  ‘to  send  the  Ring  to  him 
would  only  postpone  the  day  of  evil.  He  is  far  away.  We 
could  not  now  take  it  back  to  him,  unguessed,  unmarked  by 
any  spy.  And  even  if  we  could,  soon  or  late  the  Lord  of  the 
Rings  would  learn  of  its  hiding  place  and  would  bend  all  his 
power  towards  it.  Could  that  power  be  defied  by  Bombadil 
alone?  I  think  not.  I  think  that  in  the  end,  if  all  else  is  con¬ 
quered,  Bombadil  will  fall,  Last  as  he  was  First;  and  then 
Night  will  come.’ 

‘I  know  little  of  Iarwain  save  the  name,’  said  Galdor;  ‘but 
Glorfindel,  I  think,  is  right.  Power  to  defy  our  Enemy  is  not 
in  him,  unless  such  power  is  in  the  earth  itself.  And  yet  we 
see  that  Sauron  can  torture  and  destroy  the  very  hills. 
What  power  still  remains  lies  with  us,  here  in  Imladris,  or 
with  Cirdan  at  the  Havens,  or  in  Lorien.  But  have  they  the 
strength,  have  we  here  the  strength  to  withstand  the  Enemy, 
the  coming  of  Sauron  at  the  last,  when  all  else  is  overthrown?’ 

‘I  have  not  the  strength,’  said  Elrond;  ‘neither  have  they.’ 

‘Then  if  the  Ring  cannot  be  kept  from  him  for  ever  by 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND  347 

strength,’  said  Glorfindel,  ‘two  things  only  remain  for  us  to 
attempt:  to  send  it  over  the  Sea,  or  to  destroy  it.’ 

‘But  Gandalf  has  revealed  to  us  that  we  cannot  destroy  it 
by  any  craft  that  we  here  possess,’  said  Elrond.  ‘And  they 
who  dwell  beyond  the  Sea  would  not  receive  it:  for  good  or 
ill  it  belongs  to  Middle-earth;  it  is  for  us  who  still  dwell  here 
to  deal  with  it.’ 

‘Then,’  said  Glorfindel,  ‘let  us  cast  it  into  the  deeps,  and 
so  make  the  lies  of  Saruman  come  true.  For  it  is  clear  now 
that  even  at  the  Council  his  feet  were  already  on  a  crooked 
path.  He  knew  that  the  Ring  was  not  lost  for  ever,  but  wished 
us  to  think  so;  for  he  began  to  lust  for  it  for  himself.  Yet  oft 
in  lies  truth  is  hidden:  in  the  Sea  it  would  be  safe.’ 

‘Not  safe  for  ever,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘There  are  many  things 
in  the  deep  waters;  and  seas  and  lands  may  change.  And  it  is 
not  our  part  here  to  take  thought  only  for  a  season,  or  for  a 
few  lives  of  Men,  or  for  a  passing  age  of  the  world.  We  should 
seek  a  final  end  of  this  menace,  even  if  we  do  not  hope  to 
make  one.’ 

‘And  that  we  shall  not  find  on  the  roads  to  the  Sea,’  said 
Galdor.  ‘If  the  return  to  Iarwain  be  thought  too  dangerous, 
then  flight  to  the  Sea  is  now  fraught  with  gravest  peril.  My 
heart  tells  me  that  Sauron  will  expect  us  to  take  the  western 
way,  when  he  learns  what  has  befallen.  He  soon  will.  The 
Nine  have  been  unhorsed  indeed,  but  that  is  but  a  respite, 
ere  they  find  new  steeds  and  swifter.  Only  the  waning  might 
of  Gondor  stands  now  between  him  and  a  march  in  power 
along  the  coasts  into  the  North;  and  if  he  comes,  assailing 
the  White  Towers  and  the  Havens,  hereafter  the  Elves  may 
have  no  escape  from  the  lengthening  shadows  of  Middle- 
earth.’ 

‘Long  yet  will  that  march  be  delayed,’  said  Boromir. 
‘Gondor  wanes,  you  say.  But  Gondor  stands,  and  even  the 
end  of  its  strength  is  still  very  strong.’ 

‘And  yet  its  vigilance  can  no  longer  keep  back  the  Nine,’ 
said  Galdor.  ‘And  other  roads  he  may  find  that  Gondor  does 
not  guard.’ 


348 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Then,’  said  Erestor,  ‘there  are  but  two  courses,  as  Glor- 
hndel  already  has  declared:  to  hide  the  Ring  for  ever;  or  to 
unmake  it.  But  both  are  beyond  our  power.  Who  will  read 
this  riddle  for  us?’ 

‘None  here  can  do  so,’  said  Elrond  gravely.  ‘At  least  none 
can  foretell  what  will  come  to  pass,  if  we  take  this  road  or 
that.  But  it  seems  to  me  now  clear  which  is  the  road  that  we 
must  take.  The  westward  road  seems  easiest.  Therefore  it 
must  be  shunned.  It  will  be  watched.  Too  often  the  Elves 
have  fled  that  way.  Now  at  this  last  we  must  take  a  hard  road, 
a  road  unforeseen.  There  lies  our  hope,  if  hope  it  be.  To  walk 
into  peril  -  to  Mordor.  We  must  send  the  Ring  to  the  Fire.’ 

Silence  fell  again.  Frodo,  even  in  that  fair  house,  looking 
out  upon  a  sunlit  valley  filled  with  the  noise  of  clear  waters, 
felt  a  dead  darkness  in  his  heart.  Boromir  stirred,  and  Frodo 
looked  at  him.  He  was  fingering  his  great  horn  and  frowning. 
At  length  he  spoke. 

‘I  do  not  understand  all  this,’  he  said.  ‘Saruman  is  a  traitor, 
but  did  he  not  have  a  glimpse  of  wisdom?  Why  do  you  speak 
ever  of  hiding  and  destroying?  Why  should  we  not  think  that 
the  Great  Ring  has  come  into  our  hands  to  serve  us  in  the 
very  hour  of  need?  Wielding  it  the  Free  Lords  of  the  Free 
may  surely  defeat  the  Enemy.  That  is  what  he  most  fears, 
I  deem. 

‘The  Men  of  Gondor  are  valiant,  and  they  will  never  sub¬ 
mit;  but  they  may  be  beaten  down.  Valour  needs  first 
strength,  and  then  a  weapon.  Let  the  Ring  be  your  weapon, 
if  it  has  such  power  as  you  say.  Take  it  and  go  forth  to 
victory!’ 

‘Alas,  no,’  said  Elrond.  ‘We  cannot  use  the  Ruling  Ring. 
That  we  now  know  too  well.  It  belongs  to  Sauron  and  was 
made  by  him  alone,  and  is  altogether  evil.  Its  strength, 
Boromir,  is  too  great  for  anyone  to  wield  at  will,  save  only 
those  who  have  already  a  great  power  of  their  own.  But  for 
them  it  holds  an  even  deadlier  peril.  The  very  desire  of  it 
corrupts  the  heart.  Consider  Saruman.  If  any  of  the  Wise 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


349 


should  with  this  Ring  overthrow  the  Lord  of  Mordor,  using 
his  own  arts,  he  would  then  set  himself  on  Sauron’s  throne, 
and  yet  another  Dark  Lord  would  appear.  And  that  is  another 
reason  why  the  Ring  should  be  destroyed:  as  long  as  it  is  in 
the  world  it  will  be  a  danger  even  to  the  Wise.  For  nothing  is 
evil  in  the  beginning.  Even  Sauron  was  not  so.  I  fear  to  take 
the  Ring  to  hide  it.  I  will  not  take  the  Ring  to  wield  it.’ 

‘Nor  I,’  said  Gandalf. 

Boromir  looked  at  them  doubtfully,  but  he  bowed  his  head. 
‘So  be  it,’  he  said.  ‘Then  in  Gondor  we  must  trust  to  such 
weapons  as  we  have.  And  at  the  least,  while  the  Wise  ones 
guard  this  Ring,  we  will  fight  on.  Mayhap  the  Sword-that- 
was-Broken  may  still  stem  the  tide  -  if  the  hand  that  wields 
it  has  inherited  not  an  heirloom  only,  but  the  sinews  of  the 
Kings  of  Men.’ 

Who  can  tell?’  said  Aragorn.  ‘But  we  will  put  it  to  the  test 
one  day.’ 

‘May  the  day  not  be  too  long  delayed,’  said  Boromir.  ‘For 
though  I  do  not  ask  for  aid,  we  need  it.  It  would  comfort  us 
to  know  that  others  fought  also  with  all  the  means  that  they 
have.’ 

‘Then  be  comforted,’  said  Elrond.  ‘For  there  are  other 
powers  and  realms  that  you  know  not,  and  they  are  hidden 
from  you.  Anduin  the  Great  flows  past  many  shores,  ere  it 
comes  to  Argonath  and  the  Gates  of  Gondor.’ 

‘Still  it  might  be  well  for  all,’  said  Gloin  the  Dwarf,  ‘if  all 
these  strengths  were  joined,  and  the  powers  of  each  were 
used  in  league.  Other  rings  there  may  be,  less  treacherous, 
that  might  be  used  in  our  need.  The  Seven  are  lost  to  us  -  if 
Balin  has  not  found  the  ring  of  Thror,  which  was  the  last; 
naught  has  been  heard  of  it  since  Thror  perished  in  Moria. 
Indeed  I  may  now  reveal  that  it  was  partly  in  hope  to  find 
that  ring  that  Balin  went  away.’ 

‘Balin  will  find  no  ring  in  Moria,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘Thror 
gave  it  to  Thrain  his  son,  but  not  Thrain  to  Thorin.  It  was 
taken  with  torment  from  Thrain  in  the  dungeons  of  Dol 
Guldur.  I  came  too  late.’ 


350 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Ah,  alas!’  cried  Gloin.  ‘When  will  the  day  come  of  our 
revenge?  But  still  there  are  the  Three.  What  of  the  Three 
Rings  of  the  Elves?  Very  mighty  Rings,  it  is  said.  Do  not  the 
Elf-lords  keep  them?  Yet  they  too  were  made  by  the  Dark 
Lord  long  ago.  Are  they  idle?  I  see  Elf-lords  here.  Will  they 
not  say?’ 

The  Elves  returned  no  answer.  ‘Did  you  not  hear  me, 
Gloin?’  said  Elrond.  ‘The  Three  were  not  made  by  Sauron, 
nor  did  he  ever  touch  them.  But  of  them  it  is  not  permitted 
to  speak.  So  much  only  in  this  hour  of  doubt  I  may  now  say. 
They  are  not  idle.  But  they  were  not  made  as  weapons  of 
war  or  conquest:  that  is  not  their  power.  Those  who  made 
them  did  not  desire  strength  or  domination  or  hoarded 
wealth,  but  understanding,  making,  and  healing,  to  preserve 
all  things  unstained.  These  things  the  Elves  of  Middle-earth 
have  in  some  measure  gained,  though  with  sorrow.  But  all 
that  has  been  wrought  by  those  who  wield  the  Three  will  turn 
to  their  undoing,  and  their  minds  and  hearts  will  become 
revealed  to  Sauron,  if  he  regains  the  One.  It  would  be  better 
if  the  Three  had  never  been.  That  is  his  purpose.’ 

‘But  what  then  would  happen,  if  the  Ruling  Ring  were 
destroyed,  as  you  counsel?’  asked  Gloin. 

‘We  know  not  for  certain,’  answered  Elrond  sadly.  ‘Some 
hope  that  the  Three  Rings,  which  Sauron  has  never  touched, 
would  then  become  free,  and  their  rulers  might  heal  the  hurts 
of  the  world  that  he  has  wrought.  But  maybe  when  the  One 
has  gone,  the  Three  will  fail,  and  many  fair  things  will  fade 
and  be  forgotten.  That  is  my  belief.’ 

‘Yet  all  the  Elves  are  willing  to  endure  this  chance,’  said 
Glorfindel,  ‘if  by  it  the  power  of  Sauron  may  be  broken,  and 
the  fear  of  his  dominion  be  taken  away  for  ever.’ 

‘Thus  we  return  once  more  to  the  destroying  of  the  Ring,’ 
said  Erestor,  ‘and  yet  we  come  no  nearer.  What  strength  have 
we  for  the  finding  of  the  Fire  in  which  it  was  made?  That  is 
the  path  of  despair.  Of  folly  I  would  say,  if  the  long  wisdom 
of  Elrond  did  not  forbid  me.’ 

‘Despair,  or  folly?’  said  Gandalf.  ‘It  is  not  despair,  for 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


351 


despair  is  only  for  those  who  see  the  end  beyond  all  doubt. 
We  do  not.  It  is  wisdom  to  recognize  necessity,  when  all  other 
courses  have  been  weighed,  though  as  folly  it  may  appear  to 
those  who  cling  to  false  hope.  Well,  let  folly  be  our  cloak,  a 
veil  before  the  eyes  of  the  Enemy!  For  he  is  very  wise,  and 
weighs  all  things  to  a  nicety  in  the  scales  of  his  malice.  But 
the  only  measure  that  he  knows  is  desire,  desire  for  power; 
and  so  he  judges  all  hearts.  Into  his  heart  the  thought  will  not 
enter  that  any  will  refuse  it,  that  having  the  Ring  we  may 
seek  to  destroy  it.  If  we  seek  this,  we  shall  put  him  out  of 
reckoning.’ 

‘At  least  for  a  while,’  said  Elrond.  ‘The  road  must  be  trod, 
but  it  will  be  very  hard.  And  neither  strength  nor  wisdom  will 
carry  us  far  upon  it.  This  quest  may  be  attempted  by  the 
weak  with  as  much  hope  as  the  strong.  Yet  such  is  oft  the 
course  of  deeds  that  move  the  wheels  of  the  world:  small 
hands  do  them  because  they  must,  while  the  eyes  of  the  great 
are  elsewhere.’ 

‘Very  well,  very  well,  Master  Elrond!’  said  Bilbo  suddenly. 
‘Say  no  more!  It  is  plain  enough  what  you  are  pointing  at. 
Bilbo  the  silly  hobbit  started  this  affair,  and  Bilbo  had  better 
finish  it,  or  himself.  I  was  very  comfortable  here,  and  getting 
on  with  my  book.  If  you  want  to  know,  I  am  just  writing  an 
ending  for  it.  I  had  thought  of  putting:  and  he  lived  happily 
ever  afterwards  to  the  end  of  his  days.  It  is  a  good  ending,  and 
none  the  worse  for  having  been  used  before.  Now  I  shall  have 
to  alter  that:  it  does  not  look  like  coming  true;  and  anyway 
there  will  evidently  have  to  be  several  more  chapters,  if  I  live 
to  write  them.  It  is  a  frightful  nuisance.  When  ought  I  to 
start?’ 

Boromir  looked  in  surprise  at  Bilbo,  but  the  laughter  died 
on  his  lips  when  he  saw  that  all  the  others  regarded  the  old 
hobbit  with  grave  respect.  Only  Gloin  smiled,  but  his  smile 
came  from  old  memories. 

‘Of  course,  my  dear  Bilbo,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘If  you  had  really 
started  this  affair,  you  might  be  expected  to  finish  it.  But  you 


352 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


know  well  enough  now  that  starting  is  too  great  a  claim  for 
any,  and  that  only  a  small  part  is  played  in  great  deeds  by 
any  hero.  You  need  not  bow!  Though  the  word  was  meant, 
and  we  do  not  doubt  that  under  jest  you  are  making  a  valiant 
offer.  But  one  beyond  your  strength,  Bilbo.  You  cannot  take 
this  thing  back.  It  has  passed  on.  If  you  need  my  advice  any 
longer,  I  should  say  that  your  part  is  ended,  unless  as  a 
recorder.  Finish  your  book,  and  leave  the  ending  unaltered! 
There  is  still  hope  for  it.  But  get  ready  to  write  a  sequel,  when 
they  come  back.’ 

Bilbo  laughed.  ‘I  have  never  known  you  give  me  pleasant 
advice  before,’  he  said.  ‘As  all  your  unpleasant  advice  has 
been  good,  I  wonder  if  this  advice  is  not  bad.  Still,  I  don’t 
suppose  I  have  the  strength  or  luck  left  to  deal  with  the  Ring. 
It  has  grown,  and  I  have  not.  But  tell  me:  what  do  you  mean 
by  they ?’ 

‘The  messengers  who  are  sent  with  the  Ring.’ 

‘Exactly!  And  who  are  they  to  be?  That  seems  to  me  what 
this  Council  has  to  decide,  and  all  that  it  has  to  decide. 
Elves  may  thrive  on  speech  alone,  and  Dwarves  endure  great 
weariness;  but  I  am  only  an  old  hobbit,  and  I  miss  my  meal 
at  noon.  Can’t  we  think  of  some  names  now?  Or  put  it  off 
till  after  dinner?’ 

No  one  answered.  The  noon-bell  rang.  Still  no  one  spoke. 
Frodo  glanced  at  all  the  faces,  but  they  were  not  turned  to 
him.  All  the  Council  sat  with  downcast  eyes,  as  if  in  deep 
thought.  A  great  dread  fell  on  him,  as  if  he  was  awaiting  the 
pronouncement  of  some  doom  that  he  had  long  foreseen  and 
vainly  hoped  might  after  all  never  be  spoken.  An  overwhelm¬ 
ing  longing  to  rest  and  remain  at  peace  by  Bilbo’s  side  in 
Rivendell  filled  all  his  heart.  At  last  with  an  effort  he  spoke, 
and  wondered  to  hear  his  own  words,  as  if  some  other  will 
was  using  his  small  voice. 

‘I  will  take  the  Ring,’  he  said,  ‘though  I  do  not  know  the 
way.’ 


THE  COUNCIL  OF  ELROND 


353 


Elrond  raised  his  eyes  and  looked  at  him,  and  Frodo  felt 
his  heart  pierced  by  the  sudden  keenness  of  the  glance.  ‘If  I 
understand  aright  all  that  I  have  heard,’  he  said,  ‘I  think  that 
this  task  is  appointed  for  you,  Frodo;  and  that  if  you  do  not 
find  a  way,  no  one  will.  This  is  the  hour  of  the  Shire-folk, 
when  they  arise  from  their  quiet  fields  to  shake  the  towers 
and  counsels  of  the  Great.  Who  of  all  the  Wise  could  have 
foreseen  it?  Or,  if  they  are  wise,  why  should  they  expect  to 
know  it,  until  the  hour  has  struck? 

‘But  it  is  a  heavy  burden.  So  heavy  that  none  could  lay  it 
on  another.  I  do  not  lay  it  on  you.  But  if  you  take  it  freely,  I 
will  say  that  your  choice  is  right;  and  though  all  the  mighty 
Elf-friends  of  old,  Hador,  and  Hurin,  and  Turin,  and  Beren 
himself  were  assembled  together,  your  seat  should  be  among 
them.’ 

‘But  you  won’t  send  him  off  alone  surely,  Master?’  cried 
Sam,  unable  to  contain  himself  any  longer,  and  jumping  up 
from  the  corner  where  he  had  been  quietly  sitting  on  the 
floor. 

‘No  indeed!’  said  Elrond,  turning  towards  him  with  a  smile. 
‘You  at  least  shall  go  with  him.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  separate 
you  from  him,  even  when  he  is  summoned  to  a  secret  council 
and  you  are  not.’ 

Sam  sat  down,  blushing  and  muttering.  ‘A  nice  pickle  we 
have  landed  ourselves  in,  Mr.  Frodo!’  he  said,  shaking  his 
head. 


Chapter  3 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


Later  that  day  the  hobbits  held  a  meeting  of  their  own  in 
Bilbo’s  room.  Merry  and  Pippin  were  indignant  when  they 
heard  that  Sam  had  crept  into  the  Council,  and  had  been 
chosen  as  Frodo’s  companion. 

‘It’s  most  unfair,’  said  Pippin.  ‘Instead  of  throwing  him 
out,  and  clapping  him  in  chains,  Elrond  goes  and  rewards 
him  for  his  cheek!’ 

‘Rewards!’  said  Frodo.  ‘I  can’t  imagine  a  more  severe  pun¬ 
ishment.  You  are  not  thinking  what  you  are  saying:  con¬ 
demned  to  go  on  this  hopeless  journey,  a  reward?  Yesterday 
I  dreamed  that  my  task  was  done,  and  I  could  rest  here,  a 
long  while,  perhaps  for  good.’ 

‘I  don’t  wonder,’  said  Merry,  ‘and  I  wish  you  could.  But 
we  are  envying  Sam,  not  you.  If  you  have  to  go,  then  it  will 
be  a  punishment  for  any  of  us  to  be  left  behind,  even  in 
Rivendell.  We  have  come  a  long  way  with  you  and  been 
through  some  stiff  times.  We  want  to  go  on.’ 

‘That’s  what  I  meant,’  said  Pippin.  We  hobbits  ought  to 
stick  together,  and  we  will.  I  shall  go,  unless  they  chain  me 
up.  There  must  be  someone  with  intelligence  in  the  party.’ 

‘Then  you  certainly  will  not  be  chosen,  Peregrin  Took!’ 
said  Gandalf,  looking  in  through  the  window,  which  was  near 
the  ground.  ‘But  you  are  all  worrying  yourselves  unnecess¬ 
arily.  Nothing  is  decided  yet.’ 

‘Nothing  decided!’  cried  Pippin.  ‘Then  what  were  you  all 
doing?  You  were  shut  up  for  hours.’ 

‘Talking,’  said  Bilbo.  ‘There  was  a  deal  of  talk,  and  every¬ 
one  had  an  eye-opener.  Even  old  Gandalf.  I  think  Legolas’s 
bit  of  news  about  Gollum  caught  even  him  on  the  hop, 
though  he  passed  it  off.’ 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


355 


‘You  were  wrong,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘You  were  inattentive.  I 
had  already  heard  of  it  from  Gwaihir.  If  you  want  to  know, 
the  only  real  eye-openers,  as  you  put  it,  were  you  and  Frodo; 
and  I  was  the  only  one  that  was  not  surprised.’ 

‘Well,  anyway,’  said  Bilbo,  ‘nothing  was  decided  beyond 
choosing  poor  Frodo  and  Sam.  I  was  afraid  all  the  time  that 
it  might  come  to  that,  if  I  was  let  off.  But  if  you  ask  me, 
Elrond  will  send  out  a  fair  number,  when  the  reports  come 
in.  Have  they  started  yet,  Gandalf?’ 

‘Yes,’  said  the  wizard.  ‘Some  of  the  scouts  have  been  sent 
out  already.  More  will  go  tomorrow.  Elrond  is  sending  Elves, 
and  they  will  get  in  touch  with  the  Rangers,  and  maybe  with 
Thranduil’s  folk  in  Mirkwood.  And  Aragorn  has  gone  with 
Elrond’s  sons.  We  shall  have  to  scour  the  lands  all  round  for 
many  long  leagues  before  any  move  is  made.  So  cheer  up, 
Frodo!  You  will  probably  make  quite  a  long  stay  here.’ 

‘Ah!’  said  Sam  gloomily.  ‘We’ll  just  wait  long  enough  for 
winter  to  come.’ 

‘That  can’t  be  helped,’  said  Bilbo.  ‘It’s  your  fault  partly, 
Frodo  my  lad:  insisting  on  waiting  for  my  birthday.  A  funny 
way  of  honouring  it,  I  can’t  help  thinking.  Not  the  day  I 
should  have  chosen  for  letting  the  S.-B.s  into  Bag  End.  But 
there  it  is:  you  can’t  wait  now  till  spring;  and  you  can’t  go  till 
the  reports  come  back. 

When  winter  first  begins  to  bite 
and  stones  crack  in  the  frosty  night, 
when  pools  are  black  and  trees  are  bare, 

’tis  evil  in  the  Wild  to  fare. 

But  that  I  am  afraid  will  be  just  your  luck.’ 

‘I  am  afraid  it  will,’  said  Gandalf.  We  can’t  start  until  we 
have  found  out  about  the  Riders.’ 

‘I  thought  they  were  all  destroyed  in  the  flood,’  said  Merry. 

‘You  cannot  destroy  Ringwraiths  like  that,’  said  Gandalf. 
‘The  power  of  their  master  is  in  them,  and  they  stand  or  fall 
by  him.  We  hope  that  they  were  all  unhorsed  and  unmasked, 


356 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


and  so  made  for  a  while  less  dangerous;  but  we  must  find  out 
for  certain.  In  the  meantime  you  should  try  and  forget  your 
troubles,  Frodo.  I  do  not  know  if  I  can  do  anything  to  help 
you;  but  I  will  whisper  this  in  your  ears.  Someone  said  that 
intelligence  would  be  needed  in  the  party.  He  was  right.  I 
think  I  shall  come  with  you.’ 

So  great  was  Frodo’s  delight  at  this  announcement  that 
Gandalf  left  the  window-sill,  where  he  had  been  sitting,  and 
took  off  his  hat  and  bowed.  ‘I  only  said  I  think  I  shall  come. 
Do  not  count  on  anything  yet.  In  this  matter  Elrond  will  have 
much  to  say,  and  your  friend  the  Strider.  Which  reminds  me, 
I  want  to  see  Elrond.  I  must  be  off.’ 

‘How  long  do  you  think  I  shall  have  here?’  said  Frodo  to 
Bilbo  when  Gandalf  had  gone. 

‘Oh,  I  don’t  know.  I  can’t  count  days  in  Rivendell,’  said 
Bilbo.  ‘But  quite  long,  I  should  think.  We  can  have  many  a 
good  talk.  What  about  helping  me  with  my  book,  and  making 
a  start  on  the  next?  Have  you  thought  of  an  ending?’ 

‘Yes,  several,  and  all  are  dark  and  unpleasant,’  said  Frodo. 

‘Oh,  that  won’t  do!’  said  Bilbo.  ‘Books  ought  to  have  good 
endings.  How  would  this  do:  and  they  all  settled  down  and 
lived  together  happily  ever  after ?’ 

‘It  will  do  well,  if  it  ever  comes  to  that,’  said  Frodo. 

‘Ah!’  said  Sam.  ‘And  where  will  they  five?  That’s  what  I 
often  wonder.  ’ 

For  a  while  the  hobbits  continued  to  talk  and  think  of  the 
past  journey  and  of  the  perils  that  lay  ahead;  but  such  was 
the  virtue  of  the  land  of  Rivendell  that  soon  all  fear  and 
anxiety  was  lifted  from  their  minds.  The  future,  good  or  ill, 
was  not  forgotten,  but  ceased  to  have  any  power  over  the 
present.  Health  and  hope  grew  strong  in  them,  and  they  were 
content  with  each  good  day  as  it  came,  taking  pleasure  in 
every  meal,  and  in  every  word  and  song. 

So  the  days  slipped  away,  as  each  morning  dawned  bright 
and  fair,  and  each  evening  followed  cool  and  clear.  But 
autumn  was  waning  fast;  slowly  the  golden  light  faded  to  pale 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


357 


silver,  and  the  lingering  leaves  fell  from  the  naked  trees.  A 
wind  began  to  blow  chill  from  the  Misty  Mountains  to  the 
east.  The  Hunter’s  Moon  waxed  round  in  the  night  sky,  and 
put  to  flight  all  the  lesser  stars.  But  low  in  the  South  one  star 
shone  red.  Every  night,  as  the  Moon  waned  again,  it  shone 
brighter  and  brighter.  Frodo  could  see  it  from  his  window, 
deep  in  the  heavens,  burning  like  a  watchful  eye  that  glared 
above  the  trees  on  the  brink  of  the  valley. 

The  hobbits  had  been  nearly  two  months  in  the  house  of 
Elrond,  and  November  had  gone  by  with  the  last  shreds  of 
autumn,  and  December  was  passing,  when  the  scouts  began 
to  return.  Some  had  gone  north  beyond  the  springs  of  the 
Hoarwell  into  the  Ettenmoors;  and  others  had  gone  west,  and 
with  the  help  of  Aragorn  and  the  Rangers  had  searched  the 
lands  far  down  the  Greyflood,  as  far  as  Tharbad,  where  the 
old  North  Road  crossed  the  river  by  a  ruined  town.  Many 
had  gone  east  and  south;  and  some  of  these  had  crossed  the 
Mountains  and  entered  Mirkwood,  while  others  had  climbed 
the  pass  at  the  sources  of  the  Gladden  River,  and  had  come 
down  into  Wilderland  and  over  the  Gladden  Fields  and  so  at 
length  had  reached  the  old  home  of  Radagast  at  Rhosgobel. 
Radagast  was  not  there;  and  they  had  returned  over  the  high 
pass  that  was  called  the  Redhorn  Gate.  The  sons  of  Elrond, 
Elladan  and  Elrohir,  were  the  last  to  return;  they  had  made  a 
great  journey,  passing  down  the  Silverlode  into  a  strange 
country,  but  of  their  errand  they  would  not  speak  to  any  save 
to  Elrond. 

In  no  region  had  the  messengers  discovered  any  signs  or 
tidings  of  the  Riders  or  other  servants  of  the  Enemy.  Even 
from  the  Eagles  of  the  Misty  Mountains  they  had  learned  no 
fresh  news.  Nothing  had  been  seen  or  heard  of  Gollum;  but 
the  wild  wolves  were  still  gathering,  and  were  hunting  again 
far  up  the  Great  River.  Three  of  the  black  horses  had  been 
found  at  once  drowned  in  the  flooded  Ford.  On  the  rocks  of 
the  rapids  below  it  searchers  discovered  the  bodies  of  five 
more,  and  also  a  long  black  cloak,  slashed  and  tattered.  Of 


358 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


the  Black  Riders  no  other  trace  was  to  be  seen,  and  nowhere 
was  their  presence  to  be  felt.  It  seemed  that  they  had  vanished 
from  the  North. 

‘Eight  out  of  the  Nine  are  accounted  for  at  least,’  said 
Gandalf.  ‘It  is  rash  to  be  too  sure,  yet  I  think  that  we  may 
hope  now  that  the  Ringwraiths  were  scattered,  and  have  been 
obliged  to  return  as  best  they  could  to  their  Master  in  Mordor, 
empty  and  shapeless. 

‘If  that  is  so,  it  will  be  some  time  before  they  can  begin  the 
hunt  again.  Of  course  the  Enemy  has  other  servants,  but  they 
will  have  to  journey  all  the  way  to  the  borders  of  Rivendell 
before  they  can  pick  up  our  trail.  And  if  we  are  careful  that 
will  be  hard  to  find.  But  we  must  delay  no  longer.’ 

Elrond  summoned  the  hobbits  to  him.  He  looked  gravely 
at  Frodo.  ‘The  time  has  come,’  he  said.  ‘If  the  Ring  is  to  set 
out,  it  must  go  soon.  But  those  who  go  with  it  must  not  count 
on  their  errand  being  aided  by  war  or  force.  They  must  pass 
into  the  domain  of  the  Enemy  far  from  aid.  Do  you  still  hold 
to  your  word,  Frodo,  that  you  will  be  the  Ring-bearer?’ 

‘I  do,’  said  Frodo.  ‘I  will  go  with  Sam.’ 

‘Then  I  cannot  help  you  much,  not  even  with  counsel,’ 
said  Elrond.  ‘I  can  foresee  very  little  of  your  road;  and  how 
your  task  is  to  be  achieved  I  do  not  know.  The  Shadow  has 
crept  now  to  the  feet  of  the  Mountains,  and  draws  nigh  even 
to  the  borders  of  the  Greyflood;  and  under  the  Shadow  all  is 
dark  to  me.  You  will  meet  many  foes,  some  open,  and  some 
disguised;  and  you  may  find  friends  upon  your  way  when 
you  least  look  for  it.  I  will  send  out  messages,  such  as  I  can 
contrive,  to  those  whom  I  know  in  the  wide  world;  but  so 
perilous  are  the  lands  now  become  that  some  may  well  mis¬ 
carry,  or  come  no  quicker  than  you  yourself. 

‘And  I  will  choose  you  companions  to  go  with  you,  as  far 
as  they  will  or  fortune  allows.  The  number  must  be  few,  since 
your  hope  is  in  speed  and  secrecy.  Had  I  a  host  of  Elves  in 
armour  of  the  Elder  Days,  it  would  avail  little,  save  to  arouse 
the  power  of  Mordor. 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


359 


‘The  Company  of  the  Ring  shall  be  Nine;  and  the  Nine 
Walkers  shall  be  set  against  the  Nine  Riders  that  are  evil. 
With  you  and  your  faithful  servant,  Gandalf  will  go;  for  this 
shall  be  his  great  task,  and  maybe  the  end  of  his  labours. 

‘For  the  rest,  they  shall  represent  the  other  Free  Peoples  of 
the  World:  Elves,  Dwarves,  and  Men.  Legolas  shall  be  for 
the  Elves;  and  Gimli  son  of  Gloin  for  the  Dwarves.  They  are 
willing  to  go  at  least  to  the  passes  of  the  Mountains,  and 
maybe  beyond.  For  men  you  shall  have  Aragorn  son  of 
Arathorn,  for  the  Ring  of  Isildur  concerns  him  closely.’ 

‘Strider!’  cried  Frodo. 

‘Yes,’  he  said  with  a  smile.  ‘I  ask  leave  once  again  to  be 
your  companion,  Frodo.’ 

‘I  would  have  begged  you  to  come,’  said  Frodo,  ‘only  I 
thought  you  were  going  to  Minas  Tirith  with  Boromir.’ 

‘I  am,’  said  Aragorn.  ‘And  the  Sword-that-was-Broken 
shall  be  re -forged  ere  I  set  out  to  war.  But  your  road  and  our 
road  lie  together  for  many  hundreds  of  miles.  There¬ 
fore  Boromir  will  also  be  in  the  Company.  He  is  a  valiant 
man.’ 

‘There  remain  two  more  to  be  found,’  said  Elrond.  ‘These 
I  will  consider.  Of  my  household  I  may  find  some  that  it 
seems  good  to  me  to  send.’ 

‘But  that  will  leave  no  place  for  us!’  cried  Pippin  in  dismay. 
We  don’t  want  to  be  left  behind.  We  want  to  go  with  Frodo.’ 

‘That  is  because  you  do  not  understand  and  cannot 
imagine  what  lies  ahead,’  said  Elrond. 

‘Neither  does  Frodo,’  said  Gandalf,  unexpectedly  support¬ 
ing  Pippin.  ‘Nor  do  any  of  us  see  clearly.  It  is  true  that  if 
these  hobbits  understood  the  danger,  they  would  not  dare  to 
go.  But  they  would  still  wish  to  go,  or  wish  that  they  dared, 
and  be  shamed  and  unhappy.  I  think,  Elrond,  that  in  this 
matter  it  would  be  well  to  trust  rather  to  their  friendship  than 
to  great  wisdom.  Even  if  you  chose  for  us  an  Elf-lord,  such 
as  Glorfindel,  he  could  not  storm  the  Dark  Tower,  nor  open 
the  road  to  the  Fire  by  the  power  that  is  in  him.’ 

‘You  speak  gravely,’  said  Elrond,  ‘but  I  am  in  doubt.  The 


360  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

Shire,  I  forebode,  is  not  free  now  from  peril;  and  these  two 
I  had  thought  to  send  back  there  as  messengers,  to  do  what 
they  could,  according  to  the  fashion  of  their  country,  to  warn 
the  people  of  their  danger.  In  any  case,  I  judge  that  the 
younger  of  these  two,  Peregrin  Took,  should  remain.  My 
heart  is  against  his  going.’ 

‘Then,  Master  Elrond,  you  will  have  to  lock  me  in  prison, 
or  send  me  home  tied  in  a  sack,’  said  Pippin.  ‘For  otherwise 
I  shall  follow  the  Company.’ 

‘Let  it  be  so  then.  You  shall  go,’  said  Elrond,  and  he  sighed. 
‘Now  the  tale  of  Nine  is  filled.  In  seven  days  the  Company 
must  depart.’ 

The  Sword  of  Elendil  was  forged  anew  by  Elvish  smiths, 
and  on  its  blade  was  traced  a  device  of  seven  stars  set  between 
the  crescent  Moon  and  the  rayed  Sun,  and  about  them  was 
written  many  runes;  for  Aragorn  son  of  Arathorn  was  going 
to  war  upon  the  marches  of  Mordor.  Very  bright  was  that 
sword  when  it  was  made  whole  again;  the  light  of  the  sun 
shone  redly  in  it,  and  the  light  of  the  moon  shone  cold,  and 
its  edge  was  hard  and  keen.  And  Aragorn  gave  it  a  new  name 
and  called  it  Anduril,  Flame  of  the  West. 

Aragorn  and  Gandalf  walked  together  or  sat  speaking  of 
their  road  and  the  perils  they  would  meet;  and  they  pondered 
the  storied  and  figured  maps  and  books  of  lore  that  were  in 
the  house  of  Elrond.  Sometimes  Frodo  was  with  them;  but 
he  was  content  to  lean  on  their  guidance,  and  he  spent  as 
much  time  as  he  could  with  Bilbo. 

In  those  last  days  the  hobbits  sat  together  in  the  evening  in 
the  Hall  of  Fire,  and  there  among  many  tales  they  heard  told 
in  full  the  lay  of  Beren  and  Luthien  and  the  winning  of  the 
Great  Jewel;  but  in  the  day,  while  Merry  and  Pippin  were 
out  and  about,  Frodo  and  Sam  were  to  be  found  with  Bilbo 
in  his  own  small  room.  Then  Bilbo  would  read  passages  from 
his  book  (which  still  seemed  very  incomplete),  or  scraps  of 
his  verses,  or  would  take  notes  of  Frodo’s  adventures. 

On  the  morning  of  the  last  day  Frodo  was  alone  with  Bilbo, 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH  361 

and  the  old  hobbit  pulled  out  from  under  his  bed  a  wooden 
box.  He  lifted  the  lid  and  fumbled  inside. 

‘Here  is  your  sword,’  he  said.  ‘But  it  was  broken,  you  know. 
I  took  it  to  keep  it  safe  but  I’ve  forgotten  to  ask  if  the  smiths 
could  mend  it.  No  time  now.  So  I  thought,  perhaps,  you 
would  care  to  have  this,  don’t  you  know?’ 

He  took  from  the  box  a  small  sword  in  an  old  shabby 
leathern  scabbard.  Then  he  drew  it,  and  its  polished  and 
well-tended  blade  glittered  suddenly,  cold  and  bright.  ‘This 
is  Sting,’  he  said,  and  thrust  it  with  little  effort  deep  into 
a  wooden  beam.  ‘Take  it,  if  you  like.  I  shan’t  want  it  again, 
I  expect.’ 

Frodo  accepted  it  gratefully. 

‘Also  there  is  this!’  said  Bilbo,  bringing  out  a  parcel  which 
seemed  to  be  rather  heavy  for  its  size.  He  unwound  several 
folds  of  old  cloth,  and  held  up  a  small  shirt  of  mail.  It  was 
close-woven  of  many  rings,  as  supple  almost  as  linen,  cold  as 
ice,  and  harder  than  steel.  It  shone  like  moonlit  silver,  and 
was  studded  with  white  gems.  With  it  was  a  belt  of  pearl  and 
crystal. 

‘It’s  a  pretty  thing,  isn’t  it?’  said  Bilbo,  moving  it  in  the 
light.  ‘And  useful.  It  is  my  dwarf-mail  that  Thorin  gave  me. 
I  got  it  back  from  Michel  Delving  before  I  started,  and  packed 
it  with  my  luggage.  I  brought  all  the  mementoes  of  my  Jour¬ 
ney  away  with  me,  except  the  Ring.  But  I  did  not  expect  to 
use  this,  and  I  don’t  need  it  now,  except  to  look  at  sometimes. 
You  hardly  feel  any  weight  when  you  put  it  on.’ 

‘I  should  look  -  well,  I  don’t  think  I  should  look  right  in  it,’ 
said  Frodo. 

‘Just  what  I  said  myself,’  said  Bilbo.  ‘But  never  mind  about 
looks.  You  can  wear  it  under  your  outer  clothes.  Come  on! 
You  must  share  this  secret  with  me.  Don’t  tell  anybody  else! 
But  I  should  feel  happier  if  I  knew  you  were  wearing  it.  I 
have  a  fancy  it  would  turn  even  the  knives  of  the  Black 
Riders,’  he  ended  in  a  low  voice. 

‘Very  well,  I  will  take  it,’  said  Frodo.  Bilbo  put  it  on  him, 
and  fastened  Sting  upon  the  glittering  belt;  and  then  Frodo 


362 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


put  over  the  top  his  old  weather-stained  breeches,  tunic,  and 
jacket. 

‘Just  a  plain  hobbit  you  look,’  said  Bilbo.  ‘But  there  is  more 
about  you  now  than  appears  on  the  surface.  Good  luck  to 
you!’  He  turned  away  and  looked  out  of  the  window,  trying 
to  hum  a  tune. 

‘I  cannot  thank  you  as  I  should,  Bilbo,  for  this,  and  for  all 
your  past  kindnesses,’  said  Frodo. 

‘Don’t  try!’  said  the  old  hobbit,  turning  round  and  slapping 
him  on  the  back.  ‘Ow!’  he  cried.  ‘You  are  too  hard  now  to 
slap!  But  there  you  are:  Hobbits  must  stick  together,  and 
especially  Bagginses.  All  I  ask  in  return  is:  take  as  much  care 
of  yourself  as  you  can,  and  bring  back  all  the  news  you  can, 
and  any  old  songs  and  tales  you  can  come  by.  I’ll  do  my  best 
to  finish  my  book  before  you  return.  I  should  like  to  write  the 
second  book,  if  I  am  spared.’  He  broke  off  and  turned  to  the 
window  again,  singing  softly. 

I  sit  beside  the  fire  and  think 
of  all  that  I  have  seen, 
of  meadow-flowers  and  butterflies 
in  summers  that  have  been; 

Of  yellow  leaves  and  gossamer 
in  autumns  that  there  were, 
with  morning  mist  and  silver  sun 
and  wind  upon  my  hair. 

I  sit  beside  the  fire  and  think 
of  how  the  world  will  be 
when  winter  comes  without  a  spring 
that  I  shall  ever  see. 

For  still  there  are  so  many  things 
that  I  have  never  seen: 
in  every  wood  in  every  spring 
there  is  a  different  green. 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


363 


I  sit  beside  the  fire  and  think 
of  people  long  ago, 
and  people  who  will  see  a  world 
that  I  shall  never  know. 

But  all  the  while  I  sit  and  think 
of  times  there  were  before, 

I  listen  for  returning  feet 
and  voices  at  the  door. 

It  was  a  cold  grey  day  near  the  end  of  December.  The  East 
Wind  was  streaming  through  the  bare  branches  of  the  trees, 
and  seething  in  the  dark  pines  on  the  hills.  Ragged  clouds 
were  hurrying  overhead,  dark  and  low.  As  the  cheerless 
shadows  of  the  early  evening  began  to  fall  the  Company 
made  ready  to  set  out.  They  were  to  start  at  dusk,  for  Elrond 
counselled  them  to  journey  under  cover  of  night  as  often  as 
they  could,  until  they  were  far  from  Rivendell. 

‘You  should  fear  the  many  eyes  of  the  servants  of  Sauron,’ 
he  said.  ‘I  do  not  doubt  that  news  of  the  discomfiture  of  the 
Riders  has  already  reached  him,  and  he  will  be  filled  with 
wrath.  Soon  now  his  spies  on  foot  and  wing  will  be  abroad 
in  the  northern  lands.  Even  of  the  sky  above  you  must  beware 
as  you  go  on  your  way.’ 

The  Company  took  little  gear  of  war,  for  their  hope  was 
in  secrecy  not  in  battle.  Aragorn  had  Anduril  but  no  other 
weapon,  and  he  went  forth  clad  only  in  rusty  green  and 
brown,  as  a  Ranger  of  the  wilderness.  Boromir  had  a  long 
sword,  in  fashion  like  Anduril  but  of  less  lineage,  and  he  bore 
also  a  shield  and  his  war-horn. 

‘Loud  and  clear  it  sounds  in  the  valleys  of  the  hills,’  he 
said,  ‘and  then  let  all  the  foes  of  Gondor  flee!’  Putting  it  to 
his  lips  he  blew  a  blast,  and  the  echoes  leapt  from  rock  to 
rock,  and  all  that  heard  that  voice  in  Rivendell  sprang  to  their 
feet. 

‘Slow  should  you  be  to  wind  that  horn  again,  Boromir,’ 


364  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

said  Elrond,  ‘until  you  stand  once  more  on  the  borders  of 
your  land,  and  dire  need  is  on  you.’ 

‘Maybe,’  said  Boromir.  ‘But  always  I  have  let  my  horn  cry 
at  setting  forth,  and  though  thereafter  we  may  walk  in  the 
shadows,  I  will  not  go  forth  as  a  thief  in  the  night.’ 

Gimli  the  dwarf  alone  wore  openly  a  short  shirt  of  steel- 
rings,  for  dwarves  make  light  of  burdens;  and  in  his  belt  was 
a  broad-bladed  axe.  Legolas  had  a  bow  and  a  quiver,  and  at 
his  belt  a  long  white  knife.  The  younger  hobbits  wore  the 
swords  that  they  had  taken  from  the  barrow;  but  Frodo  took 
only  Sting;  and  his  mail-coat,  as  Bilbo  wished,  remained 
hidden.  Gandalf  bore  his  staff,  but  girt  at  his  side  was  the 
elven-sword  Glamdring,  the  mate  of  Orcrist  that  lay  now 
upon  the  breast  of  Thorin  under  the  Lonely  Mountain. 

All  were  well  furnished  by  Elrond  with  thick  warm  clothes, 
and  they  had  jackets  and  cloaks  lined  with  fur.  Spare  food 
and  clothes  and  blankets  and  other  needs  were  laden  on  a 
pony,  none  other  than  the  poor  beast  that  they  had  brought 
from  Bree. 

The  stay  in  Rivendell  had  worked  a  great  wonder  of  change 
on  him:  he  was  glossy  and  seemed  to  have  the  vigour  of  youth. 
It  was  Sam  who  had  insisted  on  choosing  him,  declaring  that 
Bill  (as  he  called  him)  would  pine,  if  he  did  not  come. 

‘That  animal  can  nearly  talk,’  he  said,  ‘and  would  talk,  if 
he  stayed  here  much  longer.  He  gave  me  a  look  as  plain  as 
Mr.  Pippin  could  speak  it:  if  you  don’t  let  me  go  with  you, 
Sam,  I’ll  follow  on  my  own.’  So  Bill  was  going  as  the  beast 
of  burden,  yet  he  was  the  only  member  of  the  Company  that 
did  not  seem  depressed. 

Their  farewells  had  been  said  in  the  great  hall  by  the  fire, 
and  they  were  only  waiting  now  for  Gandalf,  who  had  not 
yet  come  out  of  the  house.  A  gleam  of  firelight  came  from 
the  open  doors,  and  soft  lights  were  glowing  in  many 
windows.  Bilbo  huddled  in  a  cloak  stood  silent  on  the  door¬ 
step  beside  Frodo.  Aragorn  sat  with  his  head  bowed  to  his 
knees;  only  Elrond  knew  fully  what  this  hour  meant  to  him. 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


365 


The  others  could  be  seen  as  grey  shapes  in  the  darkness. 

Sam  was  standing  by  the  pony,  sucking  his  teeth,  and 
staring  moodily  into  the  gloom  where  the  river  roared  stonily 
below;  his  desire  for  adventure  was  at  its  lowest  ebb. 

‘Bill,  my  lad,’  he  said,  ‘you  oughtn’t  to  have  took  up  with 
us.  You  could  have  stayed  here  and  et  the  best  hay  till  the 
new  grass  comes.’  Bill  swished  his  tail  and  said  nothing. 

Sam  eased  the  pack  on  his  shoulders,  and  went  over 
anxiously  in  his  mind  all  the  things  that  he  had  stowed 
in  it,  wondering  if  he  had  forgotten  anything:  his  chief 
treasure,  his  cooking  gear;  and  the  little  box  of  salt  that 
he  always  carried  and  refilled  when  he  could;  a  good  supply 
of  pipe-weed  (but  not  near  enough,  I’ll  warrant);  flint 
and  tinder;  woollen  hose;  linen;  various  small  belongings  of 
his  master’s  that  Frodo  had  forgotten  and  Sam  had  stowed 
to  bring  them  out  in  triumph  when  they  were  called  for.  He 
went  through  them  all. 

‘Rope!’  he  muttered.  ‘No  rope!  And  only  last  night  you 
said  to  yourself:  “Sam,  what  about  a  bit  of  rope?  You’ll  want 
it,  if  you  haven’t  got  it.”  Well,  I’ll  want  it.  I  can’t  get  it  now.’ 

At  that  moment  Elrond  came  out  with  Gandalf,  and  he 
called  the  Company  to  him.  ‘This  is  my  last  word,’  he  said 
in  a  low  voice.  ‘The  Ring-bearer  is  setting  out  on  the  Quest 
of  Mount  Doom.  On  him  alone  is  any  charge  laid:  neither  to 
cast  away  the  Ring,  nor  to  deliver  it  to  any  servant  of  the 
Enemy  nor  indeed  to  let  any  handle  it,  save  members  of  the 
Company  and  the  Council,  and  only  then  in  gravest  need. 
The  others  go  with  him  as  free  companions,  to  help  him  on 
his  way.  You  may  tarry,  or  come  back,  or  turn  aside  into 
other  paths,  as  chance  allows.  The  further  you  go,  the  less 
easy  will  it  be  to  withdraw;  yet  no  oath  or  bond  is  laid  on  you 
to  go  further  than  you  will.  For  you  do  not  yet  know  the 
strength  of  your  hearts,  and  you  cannot  foresee  what  each 
may  meet  upon  the  road.’ 

‘Faithless  is  he  that  says  farewell  when  the  road  darkens,’ 
said  Gimli. 


366 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Maybe,’  said  Elrond,  ‘but  let  him  not  vow  to  walk  in  the 
dark,  who  has  not  seen  the  nightfall.’ 

‘Yet  sworn  word  may  strengthen  quaking  heart,’  said 
Gimli. 

‘Or  break  it,’  said  Elrond.  ‘Look  not  too  far  ahead!  But  go 
now  with  good  hearts!  Farewell,  and  may  the  blessing  of  Elves 
and  Men  and  all  Free  Folk  go  with  you.  May  the  stars  shine 
upon  your  faces!’ 

‘Good  ...  good  luck!’  cried  Bilbo,  stuttering  with  the  cold. 
‘I  don’t  suppose  you  will  be  able  to  keep  a  diary,  Frodo  my 
lad,  but  I  shall  expect  a  full  account  when  you  get  back.  And 
don’t  be  too  long!  Farewell!’ 

Many  others  of  Elrond’s  household  stood  in  the  shadows 
and  watched  them  go,  bidding  them  farewell  with  soft  voices. 
There  was  no  laughter,  and  no  song  or  music.  At  last  they 
turned  away  and  faded  silently  into  the  dusk. 

They  crossed  the  bridge  and  wound  slowly  up  the  long 
steep  paths  that  led  out  of  the  cloven  vale  of  Rivendell;  and 
they  came  at  length  to  the  high  moor  where  the  wind  hissed 
through  the  heather.  Then  with  one  glance  at  the  Last 
Homely  House  twinkling  below  them  they  strode  away  far 
into  the  night. 

At  the  Ford  of  Bruinen  they  left  the  Road  and  turning 
southwards  went  on  by  narrow  paths  among  the  folded  lands. 
Their  purpose  was  to  hold  this  course  west  of  the  Mountains 
for  many  miles  and  days.  The  country  was  much  rougher 
and  more  barren  than  in  the  green  vale  of  the  Great  River  in 
Wilderland  on  the  other  side  of  the  range,  and  their  going 
would  be  slow;  but  they  hoped  in  this  way  to  escape  the 
notice  of  unfriendly  eyes.  The  spies  of  Sauron  had  hitherto 
seldom  been  seen  in  this  empty  country,  and  the  paths  were 
little  known  except  to  the  people  of  Rivendell. 

Gandalf  walked  in  front,  and  with  him  went  Aragorn,  who 
knew  this  land  even  in  the  dark.  The  others  were  in  file 
behind,  and  Legolas  whose  eyes  were  keen  was  the  rearguard. 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


367 


The  first  part  of  their  journey  was  hard  and  dreary,  and  Frodo 
remembered  little  of  it,  save  the  wind.  For  many  sunless 
days  an  icy  blast  came  from  the  Mountains  in  the  east,  and 
no  garment  seemed  able  to  keep  out  its  searching  fingers. 
Though  the  Company  was  well  clad,  they  seldom  felt  warm, 
either  moving  or  at  rest.  They  slept  uneasily  during  the 
middle  of  the  day,  in  some  hollow  of  the  land,  or  hidden 
under  the  tangled  thorn-bushes  that  grew  in  thickets  in  many 
places.  In  the  late  afternoon  they  were  roused  by  the  watch, 
and  took  their  chief  meal:  cold  and  cheerless  as  a  rule,  for 
they  could  seldom  risk  the  lighting  of  a  fire.  In  the  evening 
they  went  on  again,  always  as  nearly  southward  as  they  could 
find  a  way. 

At  first  it  seemed  to  the  hobbits  that  although  they  walked 
and  stumbled  until  they  were  weary,  they  were  creeping  for¬ 
ward  like  snails,  and  getting  nowhere.  Each  day  the  land 
looked  much  the  same  as  it  had  the  day  before.  Yet  steadily 
the  mountains  were  drawing  nearer.  South  of  Rivendell  they 
rose  ever  higher,  and  bent  westwards;  and  about  the  feet  of 
the  main  range  there  was  tumbled  an  ever  wider  land  of  bleak 
hills,  and  deep  valleys  filled  with  turbulent  waters.  Paths  were 
few  and  winding,  and  led  them  often  only  to  the  edge  of 
some  sheer  fall,  or  down  into  treacherous  swamps. 

They  had  been  a  fortnight  on  the  way  when  the  weather 
changed.  The  wind  suddenly  fell  and  then  veered  round  to 
the  south.  The  swift-flowing  clouds  lifted  and  melted  away, 
and  the  sun  came  out,  pale  and  bright.  There  came  a  cold 
clear  dawn  at  the  end  of  a  long  stumbling  night-march.  The 
travellers  reached  a  low  ridge  crowned  with  ancient  holly- 
trees  whose  grey-green  trunks  seemed  to  have  been  built  out 
of  the  very  stone  of  the  hills.  Their  dark  leaves  shone  and 
their  berries  glowed  red  in  the  light  of  the  rising  sun. 

Away  in  the  south  Frodo  could  see  the  dim  shapes  of  lofty 
mountains  that  seemed  now  to  stand  across  the  path  that  the 
Company  was  taking.  At  the  left  of  this  high  range  rose  three 
peaks;  the  tallest  and  nearest  stood  up  like  a  tooth  tipped  with 


368 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


snow;  its  great,  bare,  northern  precipice  was  still  largely  in 
the  shadow,  but  where  the  sunlight  slanted  upon  it,  it  glowed 
red. 

Gandalf  stood  at  Frodo’s  side  and  looked  out  under  his 
hand.  ‘We  have  done  well,’  he  said.  We  have  reached  the 
borders  of  the  country  that  Men  call  Flollin;  many  Elves  lived 
here  in  happier  days,  when  Eregion  was  its  name.  Five-and- 
forty  leagues  as  the  crow  flies  we  have  come,  though  many 
long  miles  further  our  feet  have  walked.  The  land  and  the 
weather  will  be  milder  now,  but  perhaps  all  the  more 
dangerous.’ 

‘Dangerous  or  not,  a  real  sunrise  is  mighty  welcome,’  said 
Frodo,  throwing  back  his  hood  and  letting  the  morning  light 
fall  on  his  face. 

‘But  the  mountains  are  ahead  of  us,’  said  Pippin.  We  must 
have  turned  eastwards  in  the  night.’ 

‘No,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘But  you  see  further  ahead  in  the  clear 
light.  Beyond  those  peaks  the  range  bends  round  south-west. 
There  are  many  maps  in  Elrond’s  house,  but  I  suppose  you 
never  thought  to  look  at  them?’ 

‘Yes  I  did,  sometimes,’  said  Pippin,  ‘but  I  don’t  remember 
them.  Frodo  has  a  better  head  for  that  sort  of  thing.’ 

‘I  need  no  map,’  said  Gimli,  who  had  come  up  with 
Legolas,  and  was  gazing  out  before  him  with  a  strange  light 
in  his  deep  eyes.  ‘There  is  the  land  where  our  fathers  worked 
of  old,  and  we  have  wrought  the  image  of  those  mountains 
into  many  works  of  metal  and  of  stone,  and  into  many 
songs  and  tales.  They  stand  tall  in  our  dreams:  Baraz,  Zirak, 
Shathur. 

‘Only  once  before  have  I  seen  them  from  afar  in  waking 
life,  but  I  know  them  and  their  names,  for  under  them  lies 
Khazad-dum,  the  Dwarrowdelf,  that  is  now  called  the  Black 
Pit,  Moria  in  the  Elvish  tongue.  Yonder  stands  Barazinbar, 
the  Redhorn,  cruel  Caradhras;  and  beyond  him  are  Silvertine 
and  Cloudyhead:  Celebdil  the  White,  and  Fanuidhol  the 
Grey,  that  we  call  Zirakzigil  and  Bundushathur. 

‘There  the  Misty  Mountains  divide,  and  between  their 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


369 


arms  lies  the  deep-shadowed  valley  which  we  cannot  for¬ 
get:  Azanulbizar,  the  Dimrill  Dale,  which  the  Elves  call 
Nanduhirion.’ 

‘It  is  for  the  Dimrill  Dale  that  we  are  making,’  said  Gandalf. 
‘If  we  climb  the  pass  that  is  called  the  Redhorn  Gate,  under 
the  far  side  of  Caradhras,  we  shall  come  down  by  the  Dimrill 
Stair  into  the  deep  vale  of  the  Dwarves.  There  lies  the 
Mirrormere,  and  there  the  River  Silverlode  rises  in  its  icy 
springs.’ 

‘Dark  is  the  water  of  Kheled-zaram,’  said  Gimli,  ‘and  cold 
are  the  springs  of  Kibil-nala.  My  heart  trembles  at  the  thought 
that  I  may  see  them  soon.’ 

‘May  you  have  joy  of  the  sight,  my  good  dwarf!’  said 
Gandalf.  ‘But  whatever  you  may  do,  we  at  least  cannot  stay 
in  that  valley.  We  must  go  down  the  Silverlode  into  the  secret 
woods,  and  so  to  the  Great  River,  and  then - ’ 

He  paused. 

‘Yes,  and  where  then?’  asked  Merry. 

‘To  the  end  of  the  journey  -  in  the  end,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘We 
cannot  look  too  far  ahead.  Let  us  be  glad  that  the  first  stage 
is  safely  over.  I  think  we  will  rest  here,  not  only  today  but 
tonight  as  well.  There  is  a  wholesome  air  about  Hollin.  Much 
evil  must  befall  a  country  before  it  wholly  forgets  the  Elves, 
if  once  they  dwelt  there.’ 

‘That  is  true,’  said  Legolas.  ‘But  the  Elves  of  this  land  were 
of  a  race  strange  to  us  of  the  silvan  folic,  and  the  trees  and 
the  grass  do  not  now  remember  them.  Only  I  hear  the  stones 
lament  them:  deep  they  delved  us,  fair  they  wrought  us,  high 
they  builded  us;  but  they  are  gone.  They  are  gone.  They  sought 
the  Havens  long  ago.’ 

That  morning  they  lit  a  fire  in  a  deep  hollow  shrouded  by 
great  bushes  of  holly,  and  their  supper-breakfast  was  merrier 
than  it  had  been  since  they  set  out.  They  did  not  hurry  to 
bed  afterwards,  for  they  expected  to  have  all  the  night  to 
sleep  in,  and  they  did  not  mean  to  go  on  again  until  the 
evening  of  the  next  day.  Only  Aragorn  was  silent  and  restless. 


370  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

After  a  while  he  left  the  Company  and  wandered  on  to  the 
ridge;  there  he  stood  in  the  shadow  of  a  tree,  looking  out 
southwards  and  westwards,  with  his  head  posed  as  if  he  was 
listening.  Then  he  returned  to  the  brink  of  the  dell  and  looked 
down  at  the  others  laughing  and  talking. 

‘What  is  the  matter,  Strider?’  Merry  called  up.  What  are 
you  looking  for?  Do  you  miss  the  East  Wind?’ 

‘No  indeed,’  he  answered.  ‘But  I  miss  something.  I  have 
been  in  the  country  of  Hollin  in  many  seasons.  No  folk  dwell 
here  now,  but  many  other  creatures  live  here  at  all  times, 
especially  birds.  Yet  now  all  things  but  you  are  silent.  I  can 
feel  it.  There  is  no  sound  for  miles  about  us,  and  your  voices 
seem  to  make  the  ground  echo.  I  do  not  understand  it.’ 

Gandalf  looked  up  with  sudden  interest.  ‘But  what  do  you 
guess  is  the  reason?’  he  asked.  ‘Is  there  more  in  it  than  sur¬ 
prise  at  seeing  four  hobbits,  not  to  mention  the  rest  of  us, 
where  people  are  so  seldom  seen  or  heard?’ 

‘I  hope  that  is  it,’  answered  Aragorn.  ‘But  I  have  a  sense  of 
watchfulness,  and  of  fear,  that  I  have  never  had  here  before.’ 

‘Then  we  must  be  more  careful,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘If  you 
bring  a  Ranger  with  you,  it  is  well  to  pay  attention  to  him, 
especially  if  the  Ranger  is  Aragorn.  We  must  stop  talking 
aloud,  rest  quietly,  and  set  the  watch.’ 

It  was  Sam’s  turn  that  day  to  take  the  first  watch,  but 
Aragorn  joined  him.  The  others  fell  asleep.  Then  the  silence 
grew  until  even  Sam  felt  it.  The  breathing  of  the  sleepers 
could  be  plainly  heard.  The  swish  of  the  pony’s  tail  and  the 
occasional  movements  of  his  feet  became  loud  noises.  Sam 
could  hear  his  own  joints  creaking,  if  he  stirred.  Dead  silence 
was  around  him,  and  over  all  hung  a  clear  blue  sky,  as  the 
Sun  rode  up  from  the  East.  Away  in  the  South  a  dark  patch 
appeared,  and  grew,  and  drove  north  like  flying  smoke  in  the 
wind. 

‘What’s  that,  Strider?  It  don’t  look  like  a  cloud,’  said  Sam 
in  a  whisper  to  Aragorn.  He  made  no  answer,  he  was  gazing 
intently  at  the  sky;  but  before  long  Sam  could  see  for  himself 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


371 


what  was  approaching.  Flocks  of  birds,  flying  at  great  speed, 
were  wheeling  and  circling,  and  traversing  all  the  land  as  if 
they  were  searching  for  something;  and  they  were  steadily 
drawing  nearer. 

‘Lie  flat  and  still!’  hissed  Aragorn,  pulling  Sam  down  into 
the  shade  of  a  holly-bush;  for  a  whole  regiment  of  birds  had 
broken  away  suddenly  from  the  main  host,  and  came,  flying 
low,  straight  towards  the  ridge.  Sam  thought  they  were  a  kind 
of  crow  of  large  size.  As  they  passed  overhead,  in  so  dense  a 
throng  that  their  shadow  followed  them  darkly  over  the 
ground  below,  one  harsh  croak  was  heard. 

Not  until  they  had  dwindled  into  the  distance,  north  and 
west,  and  the  sky  was  again  clear  would  Aragorn  rise.  Then 
he  sprang  up  and  went  and  wakened  Gandalf. 

‘Regiments  of  black  crows  are  flying  over  all  the  land 
between  the  Mountains  and  the  Greyflood,’  he  said,  ‘and 
they  have  passed  over  Hollin.  They  are  not  natives  here;  they 
are  crebain  out  of  Fangorn  and  Dunland.  I  do  not  know  what 
they  are  about:  possibly  there  is  some  trouble  away  south 
from  which  they  are  fleeing;  but  I  think  they  are  spying  out 
the  land.  I  have  also  glimpsed  many  hawks  flying  high  up  in 
the  sky.  I  think  we  ought  to  move  again  this  evening.  Hollin 
is  no  longer  wholesome  for  us:  it  is  being  watched.’ 

‘And  in  that  case  so  is  the  Redhorn  Gate,’  said  Gandalf; 
‘and  how  we  can  get  over  that  without  being  seen,  I  cannot 
imagine.  But  we  will  think  of  that  when  we  must.  As  for 
moving  as  soon  as  it  is  dark,  I  am  afraid  that  you  are  right.’ 

‘Luckily  our  fire  made  little  smoke,  and  had  burned  low 
before  the  crebain  came,’  said  Aragorn.  ‘It  must  be  put  out 
and  not  lit  again.’ 

‘Well  if  that  isn’t  a  plague  and  a  nuisance!’  said  Pippin. 
The  news:  no  fire,  and  a  move  again  by  night,  had  been 
broken  to  him,  as  soon  as  he  woke  in  the  late  afternoon.  ‘All 
because  of  a  pack  of  crows!  I  had  looked  forward  to  a  real 
good  meal  tonight:  something  hot.’ 

‘Well,  you  can  go  on  looking  forward,’  said  Gandalf. 


372 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘There  may  be  many  unexpected  feasts  ahead  for  you.  For 
myself  I  should  like  a  pipe  to  smoke  in  comfort,  and  warmer 
feet.  However,  we  are  certain  of  one  thing  at  any  rate:  it  will 
get  warmer  as  we  get  south.’ 

‘Too  warm,  I  shouldn’t  wonder,’  muttered  Sam  to  Frodo. 
‘But  I’m  beginning  to  think  it’s  time  we  got  a  sight  of  that 
Fiery  Mountain,  and  saw  the  end  of  the  Road,  so  to  speak.  I 
thought  at  first  that  this  here  Redhorn,  or  whatever  its  name 
is,  might  be  it,  till  Gimli  spoke  his  piece.  A  fair  jaw-cracker 
dwarf-language  must  be!’  Maps  conveyed  nothing  to  Sam’s 
mind,  and  all  distances  in  these  strange  lands  seemed  so  vast 
that  he  was  quite  out  of  his  reckoning. 

All  that  day  the  Company  remained  in  hiding.  The  dark 
birds  passed  over  now  and  again;  but  as  the  westering  Sun 
grew  red  they  disappeared  southwards.  At  dusk  the  Company 
set  out,  and  turning  now  half  east  they  steered  their  course 
towards  Caradhras,  which  far  away  still  glowed  faintly  red  in 
the  last  light  of  the  vanished  Sun.  One  by  one  white  stars 
sprang  forth  as  the  sky  faded. 

Guided  by  Aragorn  they  struck  a  good  path.  It  looked  to 
Frodo  like  the  remains  of  an  ancient  road,  that  had  once  been 
broad  and  well  planned,  from  Hollin  to  the  mountain-pass. 
The  Moon,  now  at  the  full,  rose  over  the  mountains,  and  cast 
a  pale  light  in  which  the  shadows  of  stones  were  black.  Many 
of  them  looked  to  have  been  worked  by  hands,  though  now 
they  lay  tumbled  and  ruinous  in  a  bleak,  barren  land. 

It  was  the  cold  chill  hour  before  the  first  stir  of  dawn,  and 
the  moon  was  low.  Frodo  looked  up  at  the  sky.  Suddenly 
he  saw  or  felt  a  shadow  pass  over  the  high  stars,  as  if  for  a 
moment  they  faded  and  then  flashed  out  again.  He  shivered. 

‘Did  you  see  anything  pass  over?’  he  whispered  to  Gandalf, 
who  was  just  ahead. 

‘No,  but  I  felt  it,  whatever  it  was,’  he  answered.  ‘It  may  be 
nothing,  only  a  wisp  of  thin  cloud.’ 

‘It  was  moving  fast  then,’  muttered  Aragorn,  ‘and  not  with 
the  wind.’ 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


373 


Nothing  further  happened  that  night.  The  next  morning 
dawned  even  brighter  than  before.  But  the  air  was  chill  again; 
already  the  wind  was  turning  back  towards  the  east.  For  two 
more  nights  they  marched  on,  climbing  steadily  but  ever 
more  slowly  as  their  road  wound  up  into  the  hills,  and  the 
mountains  towered  up,  nearer  and  nearer.  On  the  third  morn¬ 
ing  Caradhras  rose  before  them,  a  mighty  peak,  tipped  with 
snow  like  silver,  but  with  sheer  naked  sides,  dull  red  as  if 
stained  with  blood. 

There  was  a  black  look  in  the  sky,  and  the  sun  was  wan. 
The  wind  had  gone  now  round  to  the  north-east.  Gandalf 
snuffed  the  air  and  looked  back. 

‘Winter  deepens  behind  us,’  he  said  quietly  to  Aragorn. 
‘The  heights  away  north  are  whiter  than  they  were;  snow  is 
lying  far  down  their  shoulders.  Tonight  we  shall  be  on  our 
way  high  up  towards  the  Redhorn  Gate.  We  may  well  be 
seen  by  watchers  on  that  narrow  path,  and  waylaid  by  some 
evil;  but  the  weather  may  prove  a  more  deadly  enemy  than 
any.  What  do  you  think  of  your  course  now,  Aragorn?’ 

Frodo  overheard  these  words,  and  understood  that 
Gandalf  and  Aragorn  were  continuing  some  debate  that  had 
begun  long  before.  He  listened  anxiously. 

‘I  think  no  good  of  our  course  from  beginning  to  end, 
as  you  know  well,  Gandalf,’  answered  Aragorn.  ‘And  perils 
known  and  unknown  will  grow  as  we  go  on.  But  we  must  go 
on;  and  it  is  no  good  our  delaying  the  passage  of  the  moun¬ 
tains.  Further  south  there  are  no  passes,  till  one  comes  to  the 
Gap  of  Rohan.  I  do  not  trust  that  way  since  your  news  of 
Saruman.  Who  knows  which  side  now  the  marshals  of  the 
Horse-lords  serve?’ 

Who  knows  indeed!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘But  there  is  another 
way,  and  not  by  the  pass  of  Caradhras:  the  dark  and  secret 
way  that  we  have  spoken  of.’ 

‘But  let  us  not  speak  of  it  again!  Not  yet.  Say  nothing  to 
the  others,  I  beg,  not  until  it  is  plain  that  there  is  no  other 
way.’ 

‘We  must  decide  before  we  go  further,’  answered  Gandalf. 


374 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Then  let  us  weigh  the  matter  in  our  minds,  while  the 
others  rest  and  sleep,’  said  Aragorn. 

In  the  late  afternoon,  while  the  others  were  finishing  their 
breakfast,  Gandalf  and  Aragorn  went  aside  together  and 
stood  looking  at  Caradhras.  Its  sides  were  now  dark  and 
sullen,  and  its  head  was  in  grey  cloud.  Frodo  watched  them, 
wondering  which  way  the  debate  would  go.  When  they 
returned  to  the  Company  Gandalf  spoke,  and  then  he  knew 
that  it  had  been  decided  to  face  the  weather  and  the  high 
pass.  He  was  relieved.  He  could  not  guess  what  was  the  other 
dark  and  secret  way,  but  the  very  mention  of  it  had  seemed 
to  fill  Aragorn  with  dismay,  and  Frodo  was  glad  that  it  had 
been  abandoned. 

‘From  signs  that  we  have  seen  lately,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘I  fear 
that  the  Redhorn  Gate  may  be  watched;  and  also  I  have 
doubts  of  the  weather  that  is  coming  up  behind.  Snow  may 
come.  We  must  go  with  all  the  speed  that  we  can.  Even  so  it 
will  take  us  more  than  two  marches  before  we  reach  the  top 
of  the  pass.  Dark  will  come  early  this  evening.  We  must  leave 
as  soon  as  you  can  get  ready.’ 

‘I  will  add  a  word  of  advice,  if  I  may,’  said  Boromir.  ‘I  was 
born  under  the  shadow  of  the  White  Mountains  and  know 
something  of  journeys  in  the  high  places.  We  shall  meet  bitter 
cold,  if  no  worse,  before  we  come  down  on  the  other  side.  It 
will  not  help  us  to  keep  so  secret  that  we  are  frozen  to  death. 
When  we  leave  here,  where  there  are  still  a  few  trees  and 
bushes,  each  of  us  should  carry  a  faggot  of  wood,  as  large  as 
he  can  bear.’ 

‘And  Bill  could  take  a  bit  more,  couldn’t  you,  lad?’  said 
Sam.  The  pony  looked  at  him  mournfully. 

‘Very  well,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘But  we  must  not  use  the  wood 
-  not  unless  it  is  a  choice  between  fire  and  death.’ 

The  Company  set  out  again,  with  good  speed  at  first;  but 
soon  their  way  became  steep  and  difficult.  The  twisting 
and  climbing  road  had  in  many  places  almost  disappeared, 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


375 


and  was  blocked  with  many  fallen  stones.  The  night  grew 
deadly  dark  under  great  clouds.  A  bitter  wind  swirled  among 
the  rocks.  By  midnight  they  had  climbed  to  the  knees  of  the 
great  mountains.  The  narrow  path  now  wound  under  a  sheer 
wall  of  cliffs  to  the  left,  above  which  the  grim  flanks  of 
Caradhras  towered  up  invisible  in  the  gloom;  on  the  right 
was  a  gulf  of  darkness  where  the  land  fell  suddenly  into  a 
deep  ravine. 

Laboriously  they  climbed  a  sharp  slope  and  halted  for  a 
moment  at  the  top.  Frodo  felt  a  soft  touch  on  his  face.  He 
put  out  his  arm  and  saw  the  dim  white  flakes  of  snow  settling 
on  his  sleeve. 

They  went  on.  But  before  long  the  snow  was  falling  fast, 
filling  all  the  air,  and  swirling  into  Frodo’s  eyes.  The  dark 
bent  shapes  of  Gandalf  and  Aragorn  only  a  pace  or  two  ahead 
could  hardly  be  seen. 

‘I  don’t  like  this  at  all,’  panted  Sam  just  behind.  ‘Snow’s 
all  right  on  a  fine  morning,  but  I  like  to  be  in  bed  while  it’s 
falling.  I  wish  this  lot  would  go  off  to  Hobbiton!  Folk  might 
welcome  it  there.’  Except  on  the  high  moors  of  the  North¬ 
farthing  a  heavy  fall  was  rare  in  the  Shire,  and  was  regarded 
as  a  pleasant  event  and  a  chance  for  fun.  No  living  hobbit 
(save  Bilbo)  could  remember  the  Fell  Winter  of  13 11,  when 
white  wolves  invaded  the  Shire  over  the  frozen  Brandywine. 

Gandalf  halted.  Snow  was  thick  on  his  hood  and  shoulders; 
it  was  already  ankle-deep  about  his  boots. 

‘This  is  what  I  feared,’  he  said.  ‘What  do  you  say  now, 
Aragorn?’ 

‘That  I  feared  it  too,’  Aragorn  answered,  ‘but  less  than 
other  things.  I  knew  the  risk  of  snow,  though  it  seldom  falls 
heavily  so  far  south,  save  high  up  in  the  mountains.  But  we 
are  not  high  yet;  we  are  still  far  down,  where  the  paths  are 
usually  open  all  the  winter.’ 

‘I  wonder  if  this  is  a  contrivance  of  the  Enemy,’  said 
Boromir.  ‘They  say  in  my  land  that  he  can  govern  the  storms 
in  the  Mountains  of  Shadow  that  stand  upon  the  borders  of 
Mordor.  He  has  strange  powers  and  many  allies.’ 


376 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘His  arm  has  grown  long  indeed,’  said  Gimli,  ‘if  he  can 
draw  snow  down  from  the  North  to  trouble  us  here  three 
hundred  leagues  away.’ 

‘His  arm  has  grown  long,’  said  Gandalf. 

While  they  were  halted,  the  wind  died  down,  and  the 
snow  slackened  until  it  almost  ceased.  They  tramped  on 
again.  But  they  had  not  gone  more  than  a  furlong  when 
the  storm  returned  with  fresh  fury.  The  wind  whistled  and 
the  snow  became  a  blinding  blizzard.  Soon  even  Boromir 
found  it  hard  to  keep  going.  The  hobbits,  bent  nearly  double, 
toiled  along  behind  the  taller  folk,  but  it  was  plain  that  they 
could  not  go  much  further,  if  the  snow  continued.  Frodo’s 
feet  felt  like  lead.  Pippin  was  dragging  behind.  Even  Gimli, 
as  stout  as  any  dwarf  could  be,  was  grumbling  as  he 
trudged. 

The  Company  halted  suddenly,  as  if  they  had  come  to  an 
agreement  without  any  words  being  spoken.  They  heard  eerie 
noises  in  the  darkness  round  them.  It  may  have  been  only  a 
trick  of  the  wind  in  the  cracks  and  gullies  of  the  rocky  wall, 
but  the  sounds  were  those  of  shrill  cries,  and  wild  howls  of 
laughter.  Stones  began  to  fall  from  the  mountain-side,  whist¬ 
ling  over  their  heads,  or  crashing  on  the  path  beside  them. 
Every  now  and  again  they  heard  a  dull  rumble,  as  a  great 
boulder  rolled  down  from  hidden  heights  above. 

‘We  cannot  go  further  tonight,’  said  Boromir.  ‘Let  those 
call  it  the  wind  who  will;  there  are  fell  voices  on  the  air;  and 
these  stones  are  aimed  at  us.’ 

‘I  do  call  it  the  wind,’  said  Aragorn.  ‘But  that  does  not 
make  what  you  say  untrue.  There  are  many  evil  and 
unfriendly  things  in  the  world  that  have  little  love  for  those 
that  go  on  two  legs,  and  yet  are  not  in  league  with  Sauron, 
but  have  purposes  of  their  own.  Some  have  been  in  this  world 
longer  than  he.’ 

‘Caradhras  was  called  the  Cruel,  and  had  an  ill  name,’  said 
Gimli,  ‘long  years  ago,  when  rumour  of  Sauron  had  not  been 
heard  in  these  lands.’ 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH  377 

‘It  matters  little  who  is  the  enemy,  if  we  cannot  beat  off  his 
attack,’  said  Gandalf. 

‘But  what  can  we  do?’  cried  Pippin  miserably.  He  was 
leaning  on  Merry  and  Frodo,  and  he  was  shivering. 

‘Either  stop  where  we  are,  or  go  back,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘It  is 
no  good  going  on.  Only  a  little  higher,  if  I  remember  rightly, 
this  path  leaves  the  cliff  and  runs  into  a  wide  shallow  trough 
at  the  bottom  of  a  long  hard  slope.  We  should  have  no  shelter 
there  from  snow,  or  stones  -  or  anything  else.’ 

‘And  it  is  no  good  going  back  while  the  storm  holds,’  said 
Aragorn.  ‘We  have  passed  no  place  on  the  way  up  that  offered 
more  shelter  than  this  cliff- wall  we  are  under  now.’ 

‘Shelter!’  muttered  Sam.  ‘If  this  is  shelter,  then  one  wall 
and  no  roof  make  a  house.’ 

The  Company  now  gathered  together  as  close  to  the  cliff 
as  they  could.  It  faced  southwards,  and  near  the  bottom  it 
leaned  out  a  little,  so  that  they  hoped  it  would  give  them 
some  protection  from  the  northerly  wind  and  from  the  falling 
stones.  But  eddying  blasts  swirled  round  them  from  every 
side,  and  the  snow  flowed  down  in  ever  denser  clouds. 

They  huddled  together  with  their  backs  to  the  wall.  Bill  the 
pony  stood  patiently  but  dejectedly  in  front  of  the  hobbits, 
and  screened  them  a  little;  but  before  long  the  drifting  snow 
was  above  his  hocks,  and  it  went  on  mounting.  If  they  had 
had  no  larger  companions  the  hobbits  would  soon  have  been 
entirely  buried. 

A  great  sleepiness  came  over  Frodo;  he  felt  himself  sinking 
fast  into  a  warm  and  hazy  dream.  He  thought  a  fire  was 
heating  his  toes,  and  out  of  the  shadows  on  the  other  side  of 
the  hearth  he  heard  Bilbo’s  voice  speaking.  I  don’t  think  much 
of  your  diary,  he  said.  Snowstorms  on  January  the  twelfth:  there 
was  no  need  to  come  back  to  report  that! 

But  I  wanted  rest  and  sleep,  Bilbo,  Frodo  answered  with  an 
effort,  when  he  felt  himself  shaken,  and  he  came  back  pain¬ 
fully  to  wakefulness.  Boromir  had  lifted  him  off  the  ground 
out  of  a  nest  of  snow. 


378 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘This  will  be  the  death  of  the  halflings,  Gandalf,’  said 
Boromir.  ‘It  is  useless  to  sit  here  until  the  snow  goes  over  our 
heads.  We  must  do  something  to  save  ourselves.’ 

‘Give  them  this,’  said  Gandalf,  searching  in  his  pack  and 
drawing  out  a  leathern  flask.  ‘Just  a  mouthful  each  -  for  all 
of  us.  It  is  very  precious.  It  is  miruvor,  the  cordial  of  Imladris. 
Elrond  gave  it  to  me  at  our  parting.  Pass  it  round!’ 

As  soon  as  Frodo  had  swallowed  a  little  of  the  warm  and 
fragrant  liquor  he  felt  a  new  strength  of  heart,  and  the 
heavy  drowsiness  left  his  limbs.  The  others  also  revived  and 
found  fresh  hope  and  vigour.  But  the  snow  did  not  relent.  It 
whirled  about  them  thicker  than  ever,  and  the  wind  blew 
louder. 

‘What  do  you  say  to  fire?’  asked  Boromir  suddenly.  ‘The 
choice  seems  near  now  between  fire  and  death,  Gandalf. 
Doubtless  we  shall  be  hidden  from  all  unfriendly  eyes  when 
the  snow  has  covered  us,  but  that  will  not  help  us.’ 

‘You  may  make  a  fire,  if  you  can,’  answered  Gandalf.  ‘If 
there  are  any  watchers  that  can  endure  this  storm,  then  they 
can  see  us,  fire  or  no.’ 

But  though  they  had  brought  wood  and  kindlings  by  the 
advice  of  Boromir,  it  passed  the  skill  of  Elf  or  even  Dwarf  to 
strike  a  flame  that  would  hold  amid  the  swirling  wind  or  catch 
in  the  wet  fuel.  At  last  reluctantly  Gandalf  himself  took  a 
hand.  Picking  up  a  faggot  he  held  it  aloft  for  a  moment,  and 
then  with  a  word  of  command,  naur  an  edraith  ammen!  he 
thrust  the  end  of  his  staff  into  the  midst  of  it.  At  once  a  great 
spout  of  green  and  blue  flame  sprang  out,  and  the  wood 
flared  and  sputtered. 

‘If  there  are  any  to  see,  then  I  at  least  am  revealed  to  them,’ 
he  said.  ‘I  have  written  Gandalf  is  here  in  signs  that  all  can 
read  from  Rivendell  to  the  mouths  of  Anduin.’ 

But  the  Company  cared  no  longer  for  watchers  or  un¬ 
friendly  eyes.  Their  hearts  were  rejoiced  to  see  the  light  of 
the  fire.  The  wood  burned  merrily;  and  though  all  round  it 
the  snow  hissed,  and  pools  of  slush  crept  under  their  feet, 
they  warmed  their  hands  gladly  at  the  blaze.  There  they 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


379 


stood,  stooping  in  a  circle  round  the  little  dancing  and  blow¬ 
ing  flames.  A  red  light  was  on  their  tired  and  anxious  faces; 
behind  them  the  night  was  like  a  black  wall. 

But  the  wood  was  burning  fast,  and  the  snow  still  fell. 

The  fire  burned  low,  and  the  last  faggot  was  thrown  on. 

‘The  night  is  getting  old,’  said  Aragorn.  ‘The  dawn  is  not 
far  off.’ 

‘If  any  dawn  can  pierce  these  clouds,’  said  Gimli. 

Boromir  stepped  out  of  the  circle  and  stared  up  into  the 
blackness.  ‘The  snow  is  growing  less,’  he  said,  ‘and  the  wind 
is  quieter.’ 

Frodo  gazed  wearily  at  the  flakes  still  falling  out  of  the  dark 
to  be  revealed  white  for  a  moment  in  the  light  of  the  dying 
fire;  but  for  a  long  time  he  could  see  no  sign  of  their  slacken¬ 
ing.  Then  suddenly,  as  sleep  was  beginning  to  creep  over 
him  again,  he  was  aware  that  the  wind  had  indeed  fallen,  and 
the  flakes  were  becoming  larger  and  fewer.  Very  slowly  a  dim 
light  began  to  grow.  At  last  the  snow  stopped  altogether. 

As  the  light  grew  stronger  it  showed  a  silent  shrouded 
world.  Below  their  refuge  were  white  humps  and  domes  and 
shapeless  deeps  beneath  which  the  path  that  they  had  trodden 
was  altogether  lost;  but  the  heights  above  were  hidden  in 
great  clouds  still  heavy  with  the  threat  of  snow. 

Gimli  looked  up  and  shook  his  head.  ‘Caradhras  has  not 
forgiven  us,’  he  said.  ‘He  has  more  snow  yet  to  fling  at  us,  if 
we  go  on.  The  sooner  we  go  back  and  down  the  better.’ 

To  this  all  agreed,  but  their  retreat  was  now  difficult.  It 
might  well  prove  impossible.  Only  a  few  paces  from  the  ashes 
of  their  fire  the  snow  lay  many  feet  deep,  higher  than  the 
heads  of  the  hobbits;  in  places  it  had  been  scooped  and  piled 
by  the  wind  into  great  drifts  against  the  cliff. 

‘If  Gandalf  would  go  before  us  with  a  bright  flame,  he 
might  melt  a  path  for  you,’  said  Legolas.  The  storm  had 
troubled  him  little,  and  he  alone  of  the  Company  remained 
still  light  of  heart. 

‘If  Elves  could  fly  over  mountains,  they  might  fetch  the  Sun 


380  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

to  save  us,’  answered  Gandalf.  ‘But  I  must  have  something  to 
work  on.  I  cannot  burn  snow.’ 

‘Well,’  said  Boromir,  ‘when  heads  are  at  a  loss  bodies  must 
serve,  as  we  say  in  my  country.  The  strongest  of  us  must 
seek  a  way.  See!  Though  all  is  now  snow-clad,  our  path,  as 
we  came  up,  turned  about  that  shoulder  of  rock  down  yonder. 
It  was  there  that  the  snow  first  began  to  burden  us.  If  we 
could  reach  that  point,  maybe  it  would  prove  easier  beyond. 
It  is  no  more  than  a  furlong  off,  I  guess.’ 

‘Then  let  us  force  a  path  thither,  you  and  I!’  said  Aragorn. 

Aragorn  was  the  tallest  of  the  Company,  but  Boromir,  little 
less  in  height,  was  broader  and  heavier  in  build.  He  led  the 
way,  and  Aragorn  followed  him.  Slowly  they  moved  off,  and 
were  soon  toiling  heavily.  In  places  the  snow  was  breast-high, 
and  often  Boromir  seemed  to  be  swimming  or  burrowing 
with  his  great  arms  rather  than  walking. 

Legolas  watched  them  for  a  while  with  a  smile  upon  his 
lips,  and  then  he  turned  to  the  others.  ‘The  strongest  must 
seek  a  way,  say  you?  But  I  say:  let  a  ploughman  plough,  but 
choose  an  otter  for  swimming,  and  for  running  light  over 
grass  and  leaf,  or  over  snow  -  an  Elf.’ 

With  that  he  sprang  forth  nimbly,  and  then  Frodo  noticed 
as  if  for  the  first  time,  though  he  had  long  known  it,  that  the 
Elf  had  no  boots,  but  wore  only  light  shoes,  as  he  always  did, 
and  his  feet  made  little  imprint  in  the  snow. 

‘Farewell!’  he  said  to  Gandalf.  ‘I  go  to  find  the  Sun!’  Then 
swift  as  a  runner  over  firm  sand  he  shot  away,  and  quickly 
overtaking  the  toiling  men,  with  a  wave  of  his  hand  he  passed 
them,  and  sped  into  the  distance,  and  vanished  round  the 
rocky  turn. 

The  others  waited  huddled  together,  watching  until 
Boromir  and  Aragorn  dwindled  into  black  specks  in  the 
whiteness.  At  length  they  too  passed  from  sight.  The  time 
dragged  on.  The  clouds  lowered,  and  now  a  few  flakes  of 
snow  came  curling  down  again. 

An  hour,  maybe,  went  by,  though  it  seemed  far  longer, 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


381 


and  then  at  last  they  saw  Legolas  coming  back.  At  the  same 
time  Boromir  and  Aragorn  reappeared  round  the  bend  far 
behind  him  and  came  labouring  up  the  slope. 

‘Well,’  cried  Legolas  as  he  ran  up,  ‘I  have  not  brought  the 
Sun.  She  is  walking  in  the  blue  fields  of  the  South,  and  a  little 
wreath  of  snow  on  this  Redhorn  hillock  troubles  her  not  at 
all.  But  I  have  brought  back  a  gleam  of  good  hope  for  those 
who  are  doomed  to  go  on  feet.  There  is  the  greatest  wind-drift 
of  all  just  beyond  the  turn,  and  there  our  Strong  Men  were 
almost  buried.  They  despaired,  until  I  returned  and  told  them 
that  the  drift  was  little  wider  than  a  wall.  And  on  the  other 
side  the  snow  suddenly  grows  less,  while  further  down  it  is 
no  more  than  a  white  coverlet  to  cool  a  hobbit’s  toes.’ 

‘Ah,  it  is  as  I  said,’  growled  Gimli.  ‘It  was  no  ordinary 
storm.  It  is  the  ill  will  of  Caradhras.  He  does  not  love  Elves 
and  Dwarves,  and  that  drift  was  laid  to  cut  off  our  escape.’ 

‘But  happily  your  Caradhras  has  forgotten  that  you  have 
Men  with  you,’  said  Boromir,  who  came  up  at  that  moment. 
‘And  doughty  Men  too,  if  I  may  say  it;  though  lesser  men 
with  spades  might  have  served  you  better.  Still,  we  have 
thrust  a  lane  through  the  drift;  and  for  that  all  here  may  be 
grateful  who  cannot  run  as  light  as  Elves.’ 

‘But  how  are  we  to  get  down  there,  even  if  you  have  cut 
through  the  drift?’  said  Pippin,  voicing  the  thought  of  all  the 
hobbits. 

‘Have  hope!’  said  Boromir.  ‘I  am  weary,  but  I  still  have 
some  strength  left,  and  Aragorn  too.  We  will  bear  the  little 
folk.  The  others  no  doubt  will  make  shift  to  tread  the  path 
behind  us.  Come,  Master  Peregrin!  I  will  begin  with  you.’ 

He  lifted  up  the  hobbit.  ‘Cling  to  my  back!  I  shall  need  my 
arms,’  he  said  and  strode  forward.  Aragorn  with  Merry  came 
behind.  Pippin  marvelled  at  his  strength,  seeing  the  passage 
that  he  had  already  forced  with  no  other  tool  than  his  great 
limbs.  Even  now,  burdened  as  he  was,  he  was  widening  the 
track  for  those  who  followed,  thrusting  the  snow  aside  as 
he  went. 

They  came  at  length  to  the  great  drift.  It  was  flung  across 


382 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


the  mountain-path  like  a  sheer  and  sudden  wall,  and  its  crest, 
sharp  as  if  shaped  with  knives,  reared  up  more  than  twice  the 
height  of  Boromir;  but  through  the  middle  a  passage  had 
been  beaten,  rising  and  falling  like  a  bridge.  On  the  far  side 
Merry  and  Pippin  were  set  down,  and  there  they  waited  with 
Legolas  for  the  rest  of  the  Company  to  arrive. 

After  a  while  Boromir  returned  carrying  Sam.  Behind  in 
the  narrow  but  now  well-trodden  track  came  Gandalf,  leading 
Bill  with  Gimli  perched  among  the  baggage.  Last  came 
Aragorn  carrying  Frodo.  They  passed  through  the  lane;  but 
hardly  had  Frodo  touched  the  ground  when  with  a  deep 
rumble  there  rolled  down  a  fall  of  stones  and  slithering  snow. 
The  spray  of  it  half  blinded  the  Company  as  they  crouched 
against  the  cliff,  and  when  the  air  cleared  again  they  saw  that 
the  path  was  blocked  behind  them. 

‘Enough,  enough!’  cried  Gimli.  ‘We  are  departing  as  quickly 
as  we  may!’  And  indeed  with  that  last  stroke  the  malice  of  the 
mountain  seemed  to  be  expended,  as  if  Caradhras  was  satisfied 
that  the  invaders  had  been  beaten  off  and  would  not  dare  to 
return.  The  threat  of  snow  lifted;  the  clouds  began  to  break 
and  the  light  grew  broader. 

As  Legolas  had  reported,  they  found  that  the  snow  became 
steadily  more  shallow  as  they  went  down,  so  that  even  the 
hobbits  could  trudge  along.  Soon  they  all  stood  once  more 
on  the  flat  shelf  at  the  head  of  the  steep  slope  where  they  had 
felt  the  first  flakes  of  snow  the  night  before. 

The  morning  was  now  far  advanced.  From  the  high  place 
they  looked  back  westwards  over  the  lower  lands.  Far  away 
in  the  tumble  of  country  that  lay  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain 
was  the  dell  from  which  they  had  started  to  climb  the  pass. 

Frodo’s  legs  ached.  He  was  chilled  to  the  bone  and  hungry; 
and  his  head  was  dizzy  as  he  thought  of  the  long  and  painful 
march  downhill.  Black  specks  swam  before  his  eyes.  He 
rubbed  them,  but  the  black  specks  remained.  In  the  distance 
below  him,  but  still  high  above  the  lower  foothills,  dark  dots 
were  circling  in  the  air. 

‘The  birds  again!’  said  Aragorn,  pointing  down. 


THE  RING  GOES  SOUTH 


383 


‘That  cannot  be  helped  now,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘Whether  they 
are  good  or  evil,  or  have  nothing  to  do  with  us  at  all,  we  must 
go  down  at  once.  Not  even  on  the  knees  of  Caradhras  will 
we  wait  for  another  night-fall!’ 

A  cold  wind  flowed  down  behind  them,  as  they  turned 
their  backs  on  the  Redhorn  Gate,  and  stumbled  wearily  down 
the  slope.  Caradhras  had  defeated  them. 


Chapter  4 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


It  was  evening,  and  the  grey  light  was  again  waning  fast, 
when  they  halted  for  the  night.  They  were  very  weary.  The 
mountains  were  veiled  in  deepening  dusk,  and  the  wind  was 
cold.  Gandalf  spared  them  one  more  mouthful  each  of  the 
miruvor  of  Rivendell.  When  they  had  eaten  some  food  he 
called  a  council. 

We  cannot,  of  course,  go  on  again  tonight,’  he  said.  ‘The 
attack  on  the  Redhorn  Gate  has  tired  us  out,  and  we  must 
rest  here  for  a  while.’ 

‘And  then  where  are  we  to  go?’  asked  Frodo. 

‘We  still  have  our  journey  and  our  errand  before  us,’ 
answered  Gandalf.  ‘We  have  no  choice  but  to  go  on,  or  to 
return  to  Rivendell.’ 

Pippin’s  face  brightened  visibly  at  the  mere  mention  of 
return  to  Rivendell;  Merry  and  Sam  looked  up  hopefully.  But 
Aragorn  and  Boromir  made  no  sign.  Frodo  looked  troubled. 

‘I  wish  I  was  back  there,’  he  said.  ‘But  how  can  I  return 
without  shame  -  unless  there  is  indeed  no  other  way,  and  we 
are  already  defeated?’ 

‘You  are  right,  Frodo,’  said  Gandalf:  ‘to  go  back  is  to  admit 
defeat,  and  face  worse  defeat  to  come.  If  we  go  back  now, 
then  the  Ring  must  remain  there:  we  shall  not  be  able  to  set 
out  again.  Then  sooner  or  later  Rivendell  will  be  besieged, 
and  after  a  brief  and  bitter  time  it  will  be  destroyed.  The 
Ringwraiths  are  deadly  enemies,  but  they  are  only  shadows 
yet  of  the  power  and  terror  they  would  possess  if  the  Ruling 
Ring  was  on  their  master’s  hand  again.’ 

‘Then  we  must  go  on,  if  there  is  a  way,’  said  Frodo  with  a 
sigh.  Sam  sank  back  into  gloom. 

‘There  is  a  way  that  we  may  attempt,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘I 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


385 


thought  from  the  beginning,  when  first  I  considered  this  jour¬ 
ney,  that  we  should  try  it.  But  it  is  not  a  pleasant  way,  and  I 
have  not  spoken  of  it  to  the  Company  before.  Aragorn  was 
against  it,  until  the  pass  over  the  mountains  had  at  least  been 
tried.’ 

‘If  it  is  a  worse  road  than  the  Redhorn  Gate,  then  it  must 
be  evil  indeed,’  said  Merry.  ‘But  you  had  better  tell  us  about 
it,  and  let  us  know  the  worst  at  once.’ 

‘The  road  that  I  speak  of  leads  to  the  Mines  of  Moria,’  said 
Gandalf.  Only  Gimli  lifted  up  his  head;  a  smouldering  fire 
was  in  his  eyes.  On  all  the  others  a  dread  fell  at  the  mention 
of  that  name.  Even  to  the  hobbits  it  was  a  legend  of  vague 
fear. 

‘The  road  may  lead  to  Moria,  but  how  can  we  hope  that  it 
will  lead  through  Moria?’  said  Aragorn  darkly. 

‘It  is  a  name  of  ill  omen,’  said  Boromir.  ‘Nor  do  I  see  the 
need  to  go  there.  If  we  cannot  cross  the  mountains,  let  us 
journey  southwards,  until  we  come  to  the  Gap  of  Rohan, 
where  men  are  friendly  to  my  people,  taking  the  road  that  I 
followed  on  my  way  hither.  Or  we  might  pass  by  and  cross 
the  Isen  into  Langstrand  and  Lebennin,  and  so  come  to 
Gondor  from  the  regions  nigh  to  the  sea.’ 

‘Things  have  changed  since  you  came  north,  Boromir,’ 
answered  Gandalf.  ‘Did  you  not  hear  what  I  told  you  of 
Saruman?  With  him  I  may  have  business  of  my  own  ere  all 
is  over.  But  the  Ring  must  not  come  near  Isengard,  if  that 
can  by  any  means  be  prevented.  The  Gap  of  Rohan  is  closed 
to  us  while  we  go  with  the  Bearer. 

‘As  for  the  longer  road:  we  cannot  afford  the  time.  We 
might  spend  a  year  in  such  a  journey,  and  we  should  pass 
through  many  lands  that  are  empty  and  harbourless.  Yet  they 
would  not  be  safe.  The  watchful  eyes  both  of  Saruman  and 
of  the  Enemy  are  on  them.  When  you  came  north,  Boromir, 
you  were  in  the  Enemy’s  eyes  only  one  stray  wanderer  from 
the  South  and  a  matter  of  small  concern  to  him:  his  mind 
was  busy  with  the  pursuit  of  the  Ring.  But  you  return  now 
as  a  member  of  the  Ring’s  Company,  and  you  are  in  peril  as 


386 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


long  as  you  remain  with  us.  The  danger  will  increase  with 
every  league  that  we  go  south  under  the  naked  sky. 

‘Since  our  open  attempt  on  the  mountain-pass  our  plight 
has  become  more  desperate,  I  fear.  I  see  now  little  hope, 
if  we  do  not  soon  vanish  from  sight  for  a  while,  and  cover 
our  trail.  Therefore  I  advise  that  we  should  go  neither  over 
the  mountains,  nor  round  them,  but  under  them.  That  is 
a  road  at  any  rate  that  the  Enemy  will  least  expect  us  to 
take.’ 

‘We  do  not  know  what  he  expects,’  said  Boromir.  ‘He  may 
watch  all  roads,  likely  and  unlikely.  In  that  case  to  enter  Moria 
would  be  to  walk  into  a  trap,  hardly  better  than  knocking  at 
the  gates  of  the  Dark  Tower  itself.  The  name  of  Moria  is 
black.’ 

‘You  speak  of  what  you  do  not  know,  when  you  liken 
Moria  to  the  stronghold  of  Sauron,’  answered  Gandalf.  ‘I 
alone  of  you  have  ever  been  in  the  dungeons  of  the  Dark 
Lord,  and  only  in  his  older  and  lesser  dwelling  in  Dol  Guldur. 
Those  who  pass  the  gates  of  Barad-dur  do  not  return.  But  I 
would  not  lead  you  into  Moria  if  there  were  no  hope  of 
coming  out  again.  If  there  are  Ores  there,  it  may  prove  ill  for 
us,  that  is  true.  But  most  of  the  Ores  of  the  Misty  Mountains 
were  scattered  or  destroyed  in  the  Battle  of  Five  Armies.  The 
Eagles  report  that  Ores  are  gathering  again  from  afar;  but 
there  is  a  hope  that  Moria  is  still  free. 

‘There  is  even  a  chance  that  Dwarves  are  there,  and  that 
in  some  deep  hall  of  his  fathers,  Balin  son  of  Fundin  may  be 
found.  However  it  may  prove,  one  must  tread  the  path  that 
need  chooses!’ 

‘I  will  tread  the  path  with  you,  Gandalf!’  said  Gimli.  ‘I  will 
go  and  look  on  the  halls  of  Durin,  whatever  may  wait  there 
-  if  you  can  find  the  doors  that  are  shut.’ 

‘Good,  Gimli!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘You  encourage  me.  We  will 
seek  the  hidden  doors  together.  And  we  will  come  through. 
In  the  ruins  of  the  Dwarves,  a  dwarf’s  head  will  be  less  easy 
to  bewilder  than  Elves  or  Men  or  Hobbits.  Yet  it  will  not  be 
the  first  time  that  I  have  been  to  Moria.  I  sought  there  long 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK  387 

for  Thrain  son  of  Thror  after  he  was  lost.  I  passed  through, 
and  I  came  out  again  alive!’ 

‘I  too  once  passed  the  Dimrill  Gate,’  said  Aragorn  quietly; 
‘but  though  I  also  came  out  again,  the  memory  is  very  evil.  I 
do  not  wish  to  enter  Moria  a  second  time.’ 

‘And  I  don’t  wish  to  enter  it  even  once,’  said  Pippin. 

‘Nor  me,’  muttered  Sam. 

‘Of  course  not!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘Who  would?  But  the  ques¬ 
tion  is:  who  will  follow  me,  if  I  lead  you  there?’ 

‘I  will,’  said  Gimli  eagerly. 

‘I  will,’  said  Aragorn  heavily.  ‘You  followed  my  lead  almost 
to  disaster  in  the  snow,  and  have  said  no  word  of  blame.  I 
will  follow  your  lead  now  -  if  this  last  warning  does  not  move 
you.  It  is  not  of  the  Ring,  nor  of  us  others  that  I  am  thinking 
now,  but  of  you,  Gandalf.  And  I  say  to  you:  if  you  pass  the 
doors  of  Moria,  beware!’ 

‘I  will  not  go,’  said  Boromir;  ‘not  unless  the  vote  of 
the  whole  Company  is  against  me.  What  do  Legolas  and  the 
little  folk  say?  The  Ring-bearer’s  voice  surely  should  be 
heard?’ 

‘I  do  not  wish  to  go  to  Moria,’  said  Legolas. 

The  hobbits  said  nothing.  Sam  looked  at  Frodo.  At  last 
Frodo  spoke.  ‘I  do  not  wish  to  go,’  he  said;  ‘but  neither  do  I 
wish  to  refuse  the  advice  of  Gandalf.  I  beg  that  there  should 
be  no  vote,  until  we  have  slept  on  it.  Gandalf  will  get  votes 
easier  in  the  light  of  the  morning  than  in  this  cold  gloom. 
How  the  wind  howls!’ 

At  these  words  all  fell  into  silent  thought.  They  heard  the 
wind  hissing  among  the  rocks  and  trees,  and  there  was  a 
howling  and  wailing  round  them  in  the  empty  spaces  of  the 
night. 

Suddenly  Aragorn  leapt  to  his  feet.  ‘How  the  wind  howls!’ 
he  cried.  ‘It  is  howling  with  wolf- voices.  The  Wargs  have 
come  west  of  the  Mountains!’ 

‘Need  we  wait  until  morning  then?’  said  Gandalf.  ‘It  is  as 
I  said.  The  hunt  is  up!  Even  if  we  live  to  see  the  dawn,  who 


388 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


now  will  wish  to  journey  south  by  night  with  the  wild  wolves 
on  his  trail?’ 

‘How  far  is  Moria?’  asked  Boromir. 

‘There  was  a  door  south-west  of  Caradhras,  some  fifteen 
miles  as  the  crow  flies,  and  maybe  twenty  as  the  wolf  runs,’ 
answered  Gandalf  grimly. 

‘Then  let  us  start  as  soon  as  it  is  light  tomorrow,  if  we  can,’ 
said  Boromir.  ‘The  wolf  that  one  hears  is  worse  than  the  ore 
that  one  fears.’ 

‘True!’  said  Aragorn,  loosening  his  sword  in  its  sheath. 
‘But  where  the  warg  howls,  there  also  the  ore  prowls.’ 

‘I  wish  I  had  taken  Elrond’s  advice,’  muttered  Pippin  to 
Sam.  ‘I  am  no  good  after  all.  There  is  not  enough  of  the 
breed  of  Bandobras  the  Bullroarer  in  me:  these  howls  freeze 
my  blood.  I  don’t  ever  remember  feeling  so  wretched.’ 

‘My  heart’s  right  down  in  my  toes,  Mr.  Pippin,’  said  Sam. 
‘But  we  aren’t  etten  yet,  and  there  are  some  stout  folk  here 
with  us.  Whatever  may  be  in  store  for  old  Gandalf,  I’ll  wager 
it  isn’t  a  wolf’s  belly.’ 

For  their  defence  in  the  night  the  Company  climbed  to  the 
top  of  the  small  hill  under  which  they  had  been  sheltering.  It 
was  crowned  with  a  knot  of  old  and  twisted  trees,  about 
which  lay  a  broken  circle  of  boulder-stones.  In  the  midst  of 
this  they  lit  a  fire,  for  there  was  no  hope  that  darkness  and 
silence  would  keep  their  trail  from  discovery  by  the  hunting 
packs. 

Round  the  fire  they  sat,  and  those  that  were  not  on  guard 
dozed  uneasily.  Poor  Bill  the  pony  trembled  and  sweated 
where  he  stood.  The  howling  of  the  wolves  was  now  all  round 
them,  sometimes  nearer  and  sometimes  further  off.  In  the 
dead  of  night  many  shining  eyes  were  seen  peering  over  the 
brow  of  the  hill.  Some  advanced  almost  to  the  ring  of  stones. 
At  a  gap  in  the  circle  a  great  dark  wolf-shape  could  be 
seen  halted,  gazing  at  them.  A  shuddering  howl  broke  from 
him,  as  if  he  were  a  captain  summoning  his  pack  to  the 
assault. 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


389 


Gandalf  stood  up  and  strode  forward,  holding  his  staff 
aloft.  ‘Listen,  Hound  of  Sauron!’  he  cried.  ‘Gandalf  is  here. 
Fly,  if  you  value  your  foul  skin!  I  will  shrivel  you  from  tail  to 
snout,  if  you  come  within  this  ring.’ 

The  wolf  snarled  and  sprang  towards  them  with  a  great 
leap.  At  that  moment  there  was  a  sharp  twang.  Legolas  had 
loosed  his  bow.  There  was  a  hideous  yell,  and  the  leaping 
shape  thudded  to  the  ground;  the  Elvish  arrow  had  pierced 
its  throat.  The  watching  eyes  were  suddenly  extinguished. 
Gandalf  and  Aragorn  strode  forward,  but  the  hill  was 
deserted;  the  hunting  packs  had  fled.  All  about  them  the 
darkness  grew  silent,  and  no  cry  came  on  the  sighing  wind. 

The  night  was  old,  and  westward  the  waning  moon  was 
setting,  gleaming  fitfully  through  the  breaking  clouds.  Sud¬ 
denly  Frodo  started  from  sleep.  Without  warning  a  storm  of 
howls  broke  out  fierce  and  wild  all  about  the  camp.  A  great 
host  of  Wargs  had  gathered  silently  and  was  now  attacking 
them  from  every  side  at  once. 

‘Fling  fuel  on  the  fire!’  cried  Gandalf  to  the  hobbits.  ‘Draw 
your  blades,  and  stand  back  to  back!’ 

In  the  leaping  light,  as  the  fresh  wood  blazed  up,  Frodo 
saw  many  grey  shapes  spring  over  the  ring  of  stones.  More 
and  more  followed.  Through  the  throat  of  one  huge  leader 
Aragorn  passed  his  sword  with  a  thrust;  with  a  great  sweep 
Boromir  hewed  the  head  off  another.  Beside  them  Gimli 
stood  with  his  stout  legs  apart,  wielding  his  dwarf-axe.  The 
bow  of  Legolas  was  singing. 

In  the  wavering  firelight  Gandalf  seemed  suddenly  to  grow: 
he  rose  up,  a  great  menacing  shape  like  the  monument  of 
some  ancient  king  of  stone  set  upon  a  hill.  Stooping  like  a 
cloud,  he  lifted  a  burning  branch  and  strode  to  meet  the 
wolves.  They  gave  back  before  him.  High  in  the  air  he  tossed 
the  blazing  brand.  It  flared  with  a  sudden  white  radiance  like 
lightning;  and  his  voice  rolled  like  thunder. 

‘ Naur  an  edraith  ammen!  Naur  dan  i  ngaurhothF  he  cried. 

There  was  a  roar  and  a  crackle,  and  the  tree  above  him 


390 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


burst  into  a  leaf  and  bloom  of  blinding  flame.  The  fire  leapt 
from  tree-top  to  tree-top.  The  whole  hill  was  crowned  with 
dazzling  light.  The  swords  and  knives  of  the  defenders  shone 
and  flickered.  The  last  arrow  of  Legolas  kindled  in  the  air 
as  it  flew,  and  plunged  burning  into  the  heart  of  a  great 
wolf-chieftain.  All  the  others  fled. 

Slowly  the  fire  died  till  nothing  was  left  but  falling  ash  and 
sparks;  a  bitter  smoke  curled  above  the  burned  tree-stumps, 
and  blew  darkly  from  the  hill,  as  the  first  light  of  dawn  came 
dimly  in  the  sky.  Their  enemies  were  routed  and  did  not 
return. 

‘What  did  I  tell  you,  Mr.  Pippin?’  said  Sam,  sheathing  his 
sword.  ‘Wolves  won’t  get  him.  That  was  an  eye-opener,  and 
no  mistake!  Nearly  singed  the  hair  off  my  head!’ 

When  the  full  light  of  the  morning  came  no  signs  of 
the  wolves  were  to  be  found,  and  they  looked  in  vain  for  the 
bodies  of  the  dead.  No  trace  of  the  fight  remained  but  the 
charred  trees  and  the  arrows  of  Legolas  lying  on  the  hill -top. 
All  were  undamaged  save  one  of  which  only  the  point  was 
left. 

‘It  is  as  I  feared,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘These  were  no  ordinary 
wolves  hunting  for  food  in  the  wilderness.  Let  us  eat  quickly 
and  go!’ 

That  day  the  weather  changed  again,  almost  as  if  it  was 
at  the  command  of  some  power  that  had  no  longer  any  use 
for  snow,  since  they  had  retreated  from  the  pass,  a  power 
that  wished  now  to  have  a  clear  light  in  which  things  that 
moved  in  the  wild  could  be  seen  from  far  away.  The  wind 
had  been  turning  through  north  to  north-west  during  the 
night,  and  now  it  failed.  The  clouds  vanished  southwards 
and  the  sky  was  opened,  high  and  blue.  As  they  stood  upon 
the  hillside,  ready  to  depart,  a  pale  sunlight  gleamed  over  the 
mountain-tops. 

‘We  must  reach  the  doors  before  sunset,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘or 
I  fear  we  shall  not  reach  them  at  all.  It  is  not  far,  but  our  path 
may  be  winding,  for  here  Aragorn  cannot  guide  us;  he  has 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK  391 

seldom  walked  in  this  country,  and  only  once  have  I  been 
under  the  west  wall  of  Moria,  and  that  was  long  ago. 

‘There  it  lies,’  he  said,  pointing  away  south-eastwards  to 
where  the  mountains’  sides  fell  sheer  into  the  shadows  at  their 
feet.  In  the  distance  could  be  dimly  seen  a  line  of  bare  cliffs, 
and  in  their  midst,  taller  than  the  rest,  one  great  grey  wall. 
‘When  we  left  the  pass  I  led  you  southwards,  and  not  back 
to  our  starting  point,  as  some  of  you  may  have  noticed.  It  is 
well  that  I  did  so,  for  now  we  have  several  miles  less  to  cross, 
and  haste  is  needed.  Let  us  go!’ 

‘I  do  not  know  which  to  hope,’  said  Boromir  grimly:  ‘that 
Gandalf  will  find  what  he  seeks,  or  that  coming  to  the  cliff 
we  shall  find  the  gates  lost  for  ever.  All  choices  seem  ill,  and 
to  be  caught  between  wolves  and  the  wall  the  likeliest  chance. 
Lead  on!’ 

Gimli  now  walked  ahead  by  the  wizard’s  side,  so  eager  was 
he  to  come  to  Moria.  Together  they  led  the  Company  back 
towards  the  mountains.  The  only  road  of  old  to  Moria  from 
the  west  had  lain  along  the  course  of  a  stream,  the  Shannon, 
that  ran  out  from  the  feet  of  the  cliffs  near  where  the  doors 
had  stood.  But  either  Gandalf  was  astray,  or  else  the  land 
had  changed  in  recent  years;  for  he  did  not  strike  the  stream 
where  he  looked  to  find  it,  only  a  few  miles  southwards  from 
their  start. 

The  morning  was  passing  towards  noon,  and  still  the  Com¬ 
pany  wandered  and  scrambled  in  a  barren  country  of  red 
stones.  Nowhere  could  they  see  any  gleam  of  water  or  hear 
any  sound  of  it.  All  was  bleak  and  dry.  Their  hearts  sank. 
They  saw  no  living  thing,  and  not  a  bird  was  in  the  sky;  but 
what  the  night  would  bring,  if  it  caught  them  in  that  lost  land, 
none  of  them  cared  to  think. 

Suddenly  Gimli,  who  had  pressed  on  ahead,  called  back  to 
them.  He  was  standing  on  a  knoll  and  pointing  to  the  right. 
Hurrying  up  they  saw  below  them  a  deep  and  narrow  chan¬ 
nel.  It  was  empty  and  silent,  and  hardly  a  trickle  of  water 
flowed  among  the  brown  and  red-stained  stones  of  its  bed; 


392 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


but  on  the  near  side  there  was  a  path,  much  broken  and 
decayed,  that  wound  its  way  among  the  ruined  walls  and 
paving-stones  of  an  ancient  highroad. 

‘Ah!  Here  it  is  at  last!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘This  is  where  the 
stream  ran:  Sirannon,  the  Gate-stream,  they  used  to  call  it. 
But  what  has  happened  to  the  water,  I  cannot  guess;  it  used 
to  be  swift  and  noisy.  Come!  We  must  hurry  on.  We  are  late.’ 

The  Company  were  footsore  and  tired;  but  they  trudged 
doggedly  along  the  rough  and  winding  track  for  many  miles. 
The  sun  turned  from  the  noon  and  began  to  go  west.  After 
a  brief  halt  and  a  hasty  meal  they  went  on  again.  Before  them 
the  mountains  frowned,  but  their  path  lay  in  a  deep  trough 
of  land  and  they  could  see  only  the  higher  shoulders  and  the 
far  eastward  peaks. 

At  length  they  came  to  a  sharp  bend.  There  the  road, 
which  had  been  veering  southwards  between  the  brink  of  the 
channel  and  a  steep  fall  of  the  land  to  the  left,  turned  and 
went  due  east  again.  Rounding  the  corner  they  saw  before 
them  a  low  cliff,  some  five  fathoms  high,  with  a  broken  and 
jagged  top.  Over  it  a  trickling  water  dripped,  through  a  wide 
cleft  that  seemed  to  have  been  carved  out  by  a  fall  that  had 
once  been  strong  and  full. 

‘Indeed  things  have  changed!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘But  there  is 
no  mistaking  the  place.  There  is  all  that  remains  of  the  Stair 
Falls.  If  I  remember  right,  there  was  a  flight  of  steps  cut  in 
the  rock  at  their  side,  but  the  main  road  wound  away  left  and 
climbed  with  several  loops  up  to  the  level  ground  at  the  top. 
There  used  to  be  a  shallow  valley  beyond  the  falls  right  up 
to  the  Walls  of  Moria,  and  the  Sirannon  flowed  through  it 
with  the  road  beside  it.  Let  us  go  and  see  what  things  are  like 
now!’ 

They  found  the  stone  steps  without  difficulty,  and  Gimli 
sprang  swiftly  up  them,  followed  by  Gandalf  and  Frodo. 
When  they  reached  the  top  they  saw  that  they  could  go  no 
further  that  way,  and  the  reason  for  the  drying  up  of  the 
Gate-stream  was  revealed.  Behind  them  the  sinking  Sun  filled 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


393 


the  cool  western  sky  with  glimmering  gold.  Before  them 
stretched  a  dark  still  lake.  Neither  sky  nor  sunset  was  reflected 
on  its  sullen  surface.  The  Shannon  had  been  dammed  and 
had  filled  all  the  valley.  Beyond  the  ominous  water  were 
reared  vast  cliffs,  their  stern  faces  pallid  in  the  fading  light: 
final  and  impassable.  No  sign  of  gate  or  entrance,  not  a  fissure 
or  crack  could  Frodo  see  in  the  frowning  stone. 

‘There  are  the  Walls  of  Moria,’  said  Gandalf,  pointing 
across  the  water.  ‘And  there  the  Gate  stood  once  upon  a 
time,  the  Elven  Door  at  the  end  of  the  road  from  Hollin  by 
which  we  have  come.  But  this  way  is  blocked.  None  of  the 
Company,  I  guess,  will  wish  to  swim  this  gloomy  water  at  the 
end  of  the  day.  It  has  an  unwholesome  look.’ 

‘We  must  find  a  way  round  the  northern  edge,’  said  Gimli. 
‘The  first  thing  for  the  Company  to  do  is  to  climb  up  by  the 
main  path  and  see  where  that  will  lead  us.  Even  if  there  were 
no  lake,  we  could  not  get  our  baggage -pony  up  this  stair.’ 

‘But  in  any  case  we  cannot  take  the  poor  beast  into  the 
Mines,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘The  road  under  the  mountains  is  a 
dark  road,  and  there  are  places  narrow  and  steep  which  he 
cannot  tread,  even  if  we  can.’ 

‘Poor  old  Bill!’  said  Frodo.  ‘I  had  not  thought  of  that.  And 
poor  Sam!  I  wonder  what  he  will  say?’ 

‘I  am  sorry,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘Poor  Bill  has  been  a  useful 
companion,  and  it  goes  to  my  heart  to  turn  him  adrift  now. 
I  would  have  travelled  lighter  and  brought  no  animal,  least  of 
all  this  one  that  Sam  is  fond  of,  if  I  had  had  my  way.  I  feared 
all  along  that  we  should  be  obliged  to  take  this  road.’ 

The  day  was  drawing  to  its  end,  and  cold  stars  were  glinting 
in  the  sky  high  above  the  sunset,  when  the  Company,  with 
all  the  speed  they  could,  climbed  up  the  slopes  and  reached 
the  side  of  the  lake.  In  breadth  it  looked  to  be  no  more  than 
two  or  three  furlongs  at  the  widest  point.  How  far  it  stretched 
away  southward  they  could  not  see  in  the  failing  light;  but  its 
northern  end  was  no  more  than  half  a  mile  from  where  they 
stood,  and  between  the  stony  ridges  that  enclosed  the  valley 


394  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

and  the  water’s  edge  there  was  a  rim  of  open  ground.  They 
hurried  forward,  for  they  had  still  a  mile  or  two  to  go  before 
they  could  reach  the  point  on  the  far  shore  that  Gandalf  was 
making  for;  and  then  he  had  still  to  find  the  doors. 

When  they  came  to  the  northernmost  corner  of  the  lake 
they  found  a  narrow  creek  that  barred  their  way.  It  was  green 
and  stagnant,  thrust  out  like  a  slimy  arm  towards  the  enclos¬ 
ing  hills.  Gimli  strode  forward  undeterred,  and  found  that 
the  water  was  shallow,  no  more  than  ankle-deep  at  the  edge. 
Behind  him  they  walked  in  file,  threading  their  way  with  care, 
for  under  the  weedy  pools  were  sliding  and  greasy  stones, 
and  footing  was  treacherous.  Frodo  shuddered  with  disgust 
at  the  touch  of  the  dark  unclean  water  on  his  feet. 

As  Sam,  the  last  of  the  Company,  led  Bill  up  on  to  the  dry 
ground  on  the  far  side,  there  came  a  soft  sound:  a  swish, 
followed  by  a  plop,  as  if  a  fish  had  disturbed  the  still  surface 
of  the  water.  Turning  quickly  they  saw  ripples,  black-edged 
with  shadow  in  the  waning  light:  great  rings  were  widening 
outwards  from  a  point  far  out  in  the  lake.  There  was  a  bub¬ 
bling  noise,  and  then  silence.  The  dusk  deepened,  and  the 
last  gleams  of  the  sunset  were  veiled  in  cloud. 

Gandalf  now  pressed  on  at  a  great  pace,  and  the  others 
followed  as  quickly  as  they  could.  They  reached  the  strip  of 
dry  land  between  the  lake  and  the  cliffs:  it  was  narrow,  often 
hardly  a  dozen  yards  across,  and  encumbered  with  fallen  rock 
and  stones;  but  they  found  a  way,  hugging  the  cliff,  and 
keeping  as  far  from  the  dark  water  as  they  might.  A  mile 
southwards  along  the  shore  they  came  upon  holly  trees. 
Stumps  and  dead  boughs  were  rotting  in  the  shallows,  the 
remains  it  seemed  of  old  thickets,  or  of  a  hedge  that  had  once 
lined  the  road  across  the  drowned  valley.  But  close  under  the 
cliff  there  stood,  still  strong  and  living,  two  tall  trees,  larger 
than  any  trees  of  holly  that  Frodo  had  ever  seen  or  imagined. 
Their  great  roots  spread  from  the  wall  to  the  water.  Under 
the  looming  cliffs  they  had  looked  like  mere  bushes,  when 
seen  far  off  from  the  top  of  the  Stair;  but  now  they  towered 
overhead,  stiff,  dark,  and  silent,  throwing  deep  night-shadows 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK  395 

about  their  feet,  standing  like  sentinel  pillars  at  the  end  of  the 
road. 

‘Well,  here  we  are  at  last!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘Here  the  Elven- 
way  from  Hollin  ended.  Holly  was  the  token  of  the  people  of 
that  land,  and  they  planted  it  here  to  mark  the  end  of  their 
domain;  for  the  West-door  was  made  chiefly  for  their  use  in 
their  traffic  with  the  Lords  of  Moria.  Those  were  happier 
days,  when  there  was  still  close  friendship  at  times  between 
folk  of  different  race,  even  between  Dwarves  and  Elves.’ 

‘It  was  not  the  fault  of  the  Dwarves  that  the  friendship 
waned,’  said  Gimli. 

‘I  have  not  heard  that  it  was  the  fault  of  the  Elves,’  said 
Legolas. 

‘I  have  heard  both,’  said  Gandalf;  ‘and  I  will  not  give 
judgement  now.  But  I  beg  you  two,  Legolas  and  Gimli,  at 
least  to  be  friends,  and  to  help  me.  I  need  you  both.  The 
doors  are  shut  and  hidden,  and  the  sooner  we  find  them  the 
better.  Night  is  at  hand!’ 

Turning  to  the  others  he  said:  While  I  am  searching,  will 
you  each  make  ready  to  enter  the  Mines?  For  here  I  fear  we 
must  say  farewell  to  our  good  beast  of  burden.  You  must  lay 
aside  much  of  the  stuff  that  we  brought  against  bitter  weather: 
you  will  not  need  it  inside,  nor,  I  hope,  when  we  come 
through  and  journey  on  down  into  the  South.  Instead  each 
of  us  must  take  a  share  of  what  the  pony  carried,  especially 
the  food  and  the  water-skins.’ 

‘But  you  can’t  leave  poor  old  Bill  behind  in  this  forsaken 
place,  Mr.  Gandalf!’  cried  Sam,  angry  and  distressed.  ‘I 
won’t  have  it,  and  that’s  flat.  After  he  has  come  so  far  and 
all!’ 

‘I  am  sorry,  Sam,’  said  the  wizard.  ‘But  when  the  Door 
opens  I  do  not  think  you  will  be  able  to  drag  your  Bill  inside, 
into  the  long  dark  of  Moria.  You  will  have  to  choose  between 
Bill  and  your  master.’ 

‘He’d  follow  Mr.  Frodo  into  a  dragon’s  den,  if  I  led  him,’ 
protested  Sam.  ‘It’d  be  nothing  short  of  murder  to  turn  him 
loose  with  all  these  wolves  about.’ 


396 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘It  will  be  short  of  murder,  I  hope,’  said  Gandalf.  He  laid 
his  hand  on  the  pony’s  head,  and  spoke  in  a  low  voice.  ‘Go 
with  words  of  guard  and  guiding  on  you,’  he  said.  ‘You  are 
a  wise  beast,  and  have  learned  much  in  Rivendell.  Make  your 
ways  to  places  where  you  can  find  grass,  and  so  come  in  time 
to  Elrond’s  house,  or  wherever  you  wish  to  go. 

‘There,  Sam!  He  will  have  quite  as  much  chance  of  escap¬ 
ing  wolves  and  getting  home  as  we  have.’ 

Sam  stood  sullenly  by  the  pony  and  returned  no  answer. 
Bill,  seeming  to  understand  well  what  was  going  on,  nuzzled 
up  to  him,  putting  his  nose  to  Sam’s  ear.  Sam  burst  into 
tears,  and  fumbled  with  the  straps,  unlading  all  the  pony’s 
packs  and  throwing  them  on  the  ground.  The  others  sorted 
out  the  goods,  making  a  pile  of  all  that  could  be  left  behind, 
and  dividing  up  the  rest. 

When  this  was  done  they  turned  to  watch  Gandalf.  He 
appeared  to  have  done  nothing.  He  was  standing  between 
the  two  trees  gazing  at  the  blank  wall  of  the  cliff,  as  if  he 
would  bore  a  hole  into  it  with  his  eyes.  Gimli  was  wandering 
about,  tapping  the  stone  here  and  there  with  his  axe.  Legolas 
was  pressed  against  the  rock,  as  if  listening. 

‘Well,  here  we  are  and  all  ready,’  said  Merry;  ‘but  where 
are  the  Doors?  I  can’t  see  any  sign  of  them.’ 

‘Dwarf-doors  are  not  made  to  be  seen  when  shut,’  said 
Gimli.  ‘They  are  invisible,  and  their  own  makers  cannot  find 
them  or  open  them,  if  their  secret  is  forgotten.’ 

‘But  this  Door  was  not  made  to  be  a  secret  known  only  to 
Dwarves,’  said  Gandalf,  coming  suddenly  to  life  and  turning 
round.  ‘Unless  things  are  altogether  changed,  eyes  that  know 
what  to  look  for  may  discover  the  signs.’ 

He  walked  forward  to  the  wall.  Right  between  the  shadow 
of  the  trees  there  was  a  smooth  space,  and  over  this  he  passed 
his  hands  to  and  fro,  muttering  words  under  his  breath.  Then 
he  stepped  back. 

‘Look!’  he  said.  ‘Can  you  see  anything  now?’ 

The  Moon  now  shone  upon  the  grey  face  of  the  rock;  but 
they  could  see  nothing  else  for  a  while.  Then  slowly  on  the 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


397 


surface,  where  the  wizard’s  hands  had  passed,  faint  lines 
appeared,  like  slender  veins  of  silver  running  in  the  stone.  At 
first  they  were  no  more  than  pale  gossamer-threads,  so  fine 
that  they  only  twinkled  fitfully  where  the  Moon  caught  them, 
but  steadily  they  grew  broader  and  clearer,  until  their  design 
could  be  guessed. 

At  the  top,  as  high  as  Gandalf  could  reach,  was  an  arch  of 
interlacing  letters  in  an  Elvish  character.  Below,  though  the 
threads  were  in  places  blurred  or  broken,  the  outline  could 
be  seen  of  an  anvil  and  a  hammer  surmounted  by  a  crown 
with  seven  stars.  Beneath  these  again  were  two  trees,  each 
bearing  crescent  moons.  More  clearly  than  all  else  there  shone 
forth  in  the  middle  of  the  door  a  single  star  with  many  rays. 

‘There  are  the  emblems  of  Dunn!’  cried  Gimli. 

‘And  there  is  the  Tree  of  the  High  Elves!’  said  Legolas. 

‘And  the  Star  of  the  House  of  Feanor,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘They 
are  wrought  of  ithildin  that  mirrors  only  starlight  and  moon¬ 
light,  and  sleeps  until  it  is  touched  by  one  who  speaks  words 
now  long  forgotten  in  Middle-earth.  It  is  long  since  I  heard 
them,  and  I  thought  deeply  before  I  could  recall  them  to  my 
mind.’ 

‘What  does  the  writing  say?’  asked  Frodo,  who  was  trying 
to  decipher  the  inscription  on  the  arch.  ‘I  thought  I  knew  the 
elf-letters,  but  I  cannot  read  these.’ 

‘The  words  are  in  the  elven-tongue  of  the  West  of  Middle- 
earth  in  the  Elder  Days,’  answered  Gandalf.  ‘But  they  do  not 
say  anything  of  importance  to  us.  They  say  only:  The  Doors  of 
Durin,  Lord  ofMoria.  Speak,  friend,  and  enter.  And  underneath 
small  and  faint  is  written:  I,  Narvi,  made  them.  Celehrimhor  of 
Hollin  drew  these  signs’ 

What  does  it  mean  by  speak,  friend,  and  enter ?’  asked 
Merry. 

‘That  is  plain  enough,’  said  Gimli.  ‘If  you  are  a  friend, 
speak  the  password,  and  the  doors  will  open,  and  you  can 
enter.’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘these  doors  are  probably  governed  by 
words.  Some  dwarf-gates  will  open  only  at  special  times,  or 


398 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


r 


t 


Eerc'  is  written  in  the]FeanorUm  cViaroders  accord¬ 
ing  to  tHe'mode'of  Beleriand:  Grown  Duriu  \tarL 
ruoria;  pedo  meUonamiuno/Jm  uarvi  haineaw 
ant:  Cetebvimboro  Greyon teithontri thiw nin. 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


399 


for  particular  persons;  and  some  have  locks  and  keys  that  are 
still  needed  when  all  necessary  times  and  words  are  known. 
These  doors  have  no  key.  In  the  days  of  Durin  they  were  not 
secret.  They  usually  stood  open  and  doorwards  sat  here.  But 
if  they  were  shut,  any  who  knew  the  opening  word  could 
speak  it  and  pass  in.  At  least  so  it  is  recorded,  is  it  not,  Gimli?’ 

‘It  is,’  said  the  dwarf.  ‘But  what  the  word  was  is  not 
remembered.  Narvi  and  his  craft  and  all  his  kindred  have 
vanished  from  the  earth.’ 

‘But  do  not  you  know  the  word,  Gandalf?’  asked  Boromir 
in  surprise. 

‘No!’  said  the  wizard. 

The  others  looked  dismayed;  only  Aragorn,  who  knew 
Gandalf  well,  remained  silent  and  unmoved. 

‘Then  what  was  the  use  of  bringing  us  to  this  accursed 
spot?’  cried  Boromir,  glancing  back  with  a  shudder  at  the 
dark  water.  ‘You  told  us  that  you  had  once  passed  through 
the  Mines.  How  could  that  be,  if  you  did  not  know  how  to 
enter?’ 

‘The  answer  to  your  first  question,  Boromir,’  said  the  wiz¬ 
ard,  ‘is  that  I  do  not  know  the  word  -  yet.  But  we  shall  soon 
see.  And,’  he  added,  with  a  glint  in  his  eyes  under  their 
bristling  brows,  ‘you  may  ask  what  is  the  use  of  my  deeds 
when  they  are  proved  useless.  As  for  your  other  question:  do 
you  doubt  my  tale?  Or  have  you  no  wits  left?  I  did  not  enter 
this  way.  I  came  from  the  East. 

‘If  you  wish  to  know,  I  will  tell  you  that  these  doors  open 
outwards.  From  the  inside  you  may  thrust  them  open  with 
your  hands.  From  the  outside  nothing  will  move  them  save 
the  spell  of  command.  They  cannot  be  forced  inwards.’ 

‘What  are  you  going  to  do  then?’  asked  Pippin,  undaunted 
by  the  wizard’s  bristling  brows. 

‘Knock  on  the  doors  with  your  head,  Peregrin  Took,’  said 
Gandalf.  ‘But  if  that  does  not  shatter  them,  and  I  am  allowed 
a  little  peace  from  foolish  questions,  I  will  seek  for  the  opening 
words. 

‘I  once  knew  every  spell  in  all  the  tongues  of  Elves  or  Men 


400  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

or  Ores,  that  was  ever  used  for  such  a  purpose.  I  can  still 
remember  ten  score  of  them  without  searching  in  my  mind. 
But  only  a  few  trials,  I  think,  will  be  needed;  and  I  shall  not 
have  to  call  on  Gimli  for  words  of  the  secret  dwarf-tongue 
that  they  teach  to  none.  The  opening  words  were  Elvish,  like 
the  writing  on  the  arch:  that  seems  certain.’ 

He  stepped  up  to  the  rock  again,  and  lightly  touched  with 
his  staff  the  silver  star  in  the  middle  beneath  the  sign  of  the 
anvil. 


Annon  edhellen,  edro  hi  ammen! 

Fennas  nogothrim,  lasto  heth  lammen! 

he  said  in  a  commanding  voice.  The  silver  lines  faded,  but 
the  blank  grey  stone  did  not  stir. 

Many  times  he  repeated  these  words  in  different  order,  or 
varied  them.  Then  he  tried  other  spells,  one  after  another, 
speaking  now  faster  and  louder,  now  soft  and  slow.  Then 
he  spoke  many  single  words  of  Elvish  speech.  Nothing  hap¬ 
pened.  The  cliff  towered  into  the  night,  the  countless  stars 
were  kindled,  the  wind  blew  cold,  and  the  doors  stood  fast. 

Again  Gandalf  approached  the  wall,  and  lifting  up  his  arms 
he  spoke  in  tones  of  command  and  rising  wrath.  Edro,  edro! 
he  cried,  and  struck  the  rock  with  his  staff.  Open,  open!  he 
shouted,  and  followed  it  with  the  same  command  in  every 
language  that  had  ever  been  spoken  in  the  West  of  Middle- 
earth.  Then  he  threw  his  staff  on  the  ground,  and  sat  down 
in  silence. 

At  that  moment  from  far  off  the  wind  bore  to  their  listening 
ears  the  howling  of  wolves.  Bill  the  pony  started  in  fear,  and 
Sam  sprang  to  his  side  and  whispered  softly  to  him. 

‘Do  not  let  him  run  away!’  said  Boromir.  ‘It  seems  that  we 
shall  need  him  still,  if  the  wolves  do  not  find  us.  How  I  hate 
this  foul  pool!’  He  stooped  and  picking  up  a  large  stone  he 
cast  it  far  into  the  dark  water. 

The  stone  vanished  with  a  soft  slap;  but  at  the  same  instant 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


401 


there  was  a  swish  and  a  bubble.  Great  rippling  rings  formed 
on  the  surface  out  beyond  where  the  stone  had  fallen,  and 
they  moved  slowly  towards  the  foot  of  the  cliff. 

‘Why  did  you  do  that,  Boromir?’  said  Frodo.  ‘I  hate  this 
place,  too,  and  I  am  afraid.  I  don’t  know  of  what:  not  of 
wolves,  or  the  dark  behind  the  doors,  but  of  something  else. 
I  am  afraid  of  the  pool.  Don’t  disturb  it!’ 

‘I  wish  we  could  get  away!’  said  Merry. 

Why  doesn’t  Gandalf  do  something  quick?’  said  Pippin. 

Gandalf  took  no  notice  of  them.  He  sat  with  his  head 
bowed,  either  in  despair  or  in  anxious  thought.  The  mournful 
howling  of  the  wolves  was  heard  again.  The  ripples  on  the 
water  grew  and  came  closer;  some  were  already  lapping  on 
the  shore. 

With  a  suddenness  that  startled  them  all  the  wizard  sprang 
to  his  feet.  He  was  laughing!  ‘I  have  it!’  he  cried.  ‘Of  course, 
of  course!  Absurdly  simple,  like  most  riddles  when  you  see 
the  answer.’ 

Picking  up  his  staff  he  stood  before  the  rock  and  said  in  a 
clear  voice:  Mellon! 

The  star  shone  out  briefly  and  faded  again.  Then  silently 
a  great  doorway  was  outlined,  though  not  a  crack  or  joint  had 
been  visible  before.  Slowly  it  divided  in  the  middle  and  swung 
outwards  inch  by  inch,  until  both  doors  lay  back  against  the 
wall.  Through  the  opening  a  shadowy  stair  could  be  seen 
climbing  steeply  up;  but  beyond  the  lower  steps  the  darkness 
was  deeper  than  the  night.  The  Company  stared  in  wonder. 

‘I  was  wrong  after  all,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘and  Gimli  too.  Merry, 
of  all  people,  was  on  the  right  track.  The  opening  word  was 
inscribed  on  the  archway  all  the  time!  The  translation  should 
have  been:  Say  “Friend”  and  enter.  I  had  only  to  speak  the 
Elvish  word  for  friend  and  the  doors  opened.  Quite  simple. 
Too  simple  for  a  learned  lore-master  in  these  suspicious  days. 
Those  were  happier  times.  Now  let  us  go!’ 

He  strode  forward  and  set  his  foot  on  the  lowest  step. 
But  at  that  moment  several  things  happened.  Frodo  felt 


402  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

something  seize  him  by  the  ankle,  and  he  fell  with  a  cry.  Bill 
the  pony  gave  a  wild  neigh  of  fear,  and  turned  tail  and  dashed 
away  along  the  lakeside  into  the  darkness.  Sam  leaped  after 
him,  and  then  hearing  Frodo’s  cry  he  ran  back  again,  weeping 
and  cursing.  The  others  swung  round  and  saw  the  waters  of 
the  lake  seething,  as  if  a  host  of  snakes  were  swimming  up 
from  the  southern  end. 

Out  from  the  water  a  long  sinuous  tentacle  had  crawled;  it 
was  pale-green  and  luminous  and  wet.  Its  fingered  end  had 
hold  of  Frodo’s  foot,  and  was  dragging  him  into  the  water. 
Sam  on  his  knees  was  now  slashing  at  it  with  a  knife. 

The  arm  let  go  of  Frodo,  and  Sam  pulled  him  away,  crying 
out  for  help.  Twenty  other  arms  came  rippling  out.  The  dark 
water  boiled,  and  there  was  a  hideous  stench. 

‘Into  the  gateway!  Up  the  stairs!  Quick!’  shouted  Gandalf 
leaping  back.  Rousing  them  from  the  horror  that  seemed  to 
have  rooted  all  but  Sam  to  the  ground  where  they  stood,  he 
drove  them  forward. 

They  were  just  in  time.  Sam  and  Frodo  were  only  a  few 
steps  up,  and  Gandalf  had  just  begun  to  climb,  when  the 
groping  tentacles  writhed  across  the  narrow  shore  and  fin¬ 
gered  the  cliff-wall  and  the  doors.  One  came  wriggling  over 
the  threshold,  glistening  in  the  starlight.  Gandalf  turned  and 
paused.  If  he  was  considering  what  word  would  close  the 
gate  again  from  within,  there  was  no  need.  Many  coiling  arms 
seized  the  doors  on  either  side,  and  with  horrible  strength, 
swung  them  round.  With  a  shattering  echo  they  slammed, 
and  all  light  was  lost.  A  noise  of  rending  and  crashing  came 
dully  through  the  ponderous  stone. 

Sam,  clinging  to  Frodo’s  arm,  collapsed  on  a  step  in  the  black 
darkness.  ‘Poor  old  Bill!’  he  said  in  a  choking  voice.  ‘Poor  old 
Bill!  Wolves  and  snakes!  But  the  snakes  were  too  much  for  him. 
I  had  to  choose,  Mr.  Frodo.  I  had  to  come  with  you.’ 

They  heard  Gandalf  go  back  down  the  steps  and  thrust  his 
staff  against  the  doors.  There  was  a  quiver  in  the  stone  and 
the  stairs  trembled,  but  the  doors  did  not  open. 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


403 


‘Well,  well!’  said  the  wizard.  ‘The  passage  is  blocked 
behind  us  now,  and  there  is  only  one  way  out  -  on  the  other 
side  of  the  mountains.  I  fear  from  the  sounds  that  boulders 
have  been  piled  up,  and  the  trees  uprooted  and  thrown  across 
the  gate.  I  am  sorry;  for  the  trees  were  beautiful,  and  had 
stood  so  long.’ 

‘I  felt  that  something  horrible  was  near  from  the  moment 
that  my  foot  first  touched  the  water,’  said  Frodo.  ‘What  was 
the  thing,  or  were  there  many  of  them?’ 

‘I  do  not  know,’  answered  Gandalf;  ‘but  the  arms  were  all 
guided  by  one  purpose.  Something  has  crept,  or  has  been 
driven  out  of  dark  waters  under  the  mountains.  There  are 
older  and  fouler  things  than  Ores  in  the  deep  places  of  the 
world.’  He  did  not  speak  aloud  his  thought  that  whatever  it 
was  that  dwelt  in  the  lake,  it  had  seized  on  Frodo  first  among 
all  the  Company. 

Boromir  muttered  under  his  breath,  but  the  echoing  stone 
magnified  the  sound  to  a  hoarse  whisper  that  all  could  hear: 
‘In  the  deep  places  of  the  world!  And  thither  we  are  going 
against  my  wish.  Who  will  lead  us  now  in  this  deadly  dark?’ 

‘I  will,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘and  Gimli  shall  walk  with  me.  Follow 
my  staff!’ 

As  the  wizard  passed  on  ahead  up  the  great  steps,  he  held 
his  staff  aloft,  and  from  its  tip  there  came  a  faint  radiance. 
The  wide  stairway  was  sound  and  undamaged.  Two  hundred 
steps  they  counted,  broad  and  shallow;  and  at  the  top  they 
found  an  arched  passage  with  a  level  floor  leading  on  into  the 
dark. 

‘Let  us  sit  and  rest  and  have  something  to  eat,  here  on  the 
landing,  since  we  can’t  find  a  dining-room!’  said  Frodo.  He 
had  begun  to  shake  off  the  terror  of  the  clutching  arm,  and 
suddenly  he  felt  extremely  hungry. 

The  proposal  was  welcomed  by  all;  and  they  sat  down  on 
the  upper  steps,  dim  figures  in  the  gloom.  After  they  had 
eaten,  Gandalf  gave  them  each  a  third  sip  of  the  miruvor  of 
Rivendell. 


404 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘It  will  not  last  much  longer,  I  am  afraid,’  he  said;  ‘but  I 
think  we  need  it  after  that  horror  at  the  gate.  And  unless  we 
have  great  luck,  we  shall  need  all  that  is  left  before  we  see  the 
other  side!  Go  carefully  with  the  water,  too!  There  are  many 
streams  and  wells  in  the  Mines,  but  they  should  not  be 
touched.  We  may  not  have  a  chance  of  filling  our  skins  and 
bottles  till  we  come  down  into  Dimrill  Dale.’ 

‘How  long  is  that  going  to  take  us?’  asked  Frodo. 

‘I  cannot  say,’  answered  Gandalf.  ‘It  depends  on  many 
chances.  But  going  straight,  without  mishap  or  losing  our 
way,  we  shall  take  three  or  four  marches,  I  expect.  It  cannot 
be  less  than  forty  miles  from  West-door  to  East-gate  in  a 
direct  line,  and  the  road  may  wind  much.’ 

After  only  a  brief  rest  they  started  on  their  way  again.  All 
were  eager  to  get  the  journey  over  as  quickly  as  possible,  and 
were  willing,  tired  as  they  were,  to  go  on  marching  still  for 
several  hours.  Gandalf  walked  in  front  as  before.  In  his  left 
hand  he  held  up  his  glimmering  staff,  the  light  of  which  just 
showed  the  ground  before  his  feet;  in  his  right  he  held  his 
sword  Glamdring.  Behind  him  came  Gimli,  his  eyes  glinting 
in  the  dim  light  as  he  turned  his  head  from  side  to  side. 
Behind  the  dwarf  walked  Frodo,  and  he  had  drawn  the  short 
sword,  Sting.  No  gleam  came  from  the  blades  of  Sting  or  of 
Glamdring;  and  that  was  some  comfort,  for  being  the  work 
of  Elvish  smiths  in  the  Elder  Days  these  swords  shone  with 
a  cold  light,  if  any  Ores  were  near  at  hand.  Behind  Frodo 
went  Sam,  and  after  him  Legolas,  and  the  young  hobbits, 
and  Boromir.  In  the  dark  at  the  rear,  grim  and  silent,  walked 
Aragorn. 

The  passage  twisted  round  a  few  turns,  and  then  began  to 
descend.  It  went  steadily  down  for  a  long  while  before  it 
became  level  once  again.  The  air  grew  hot  and  stifling,  but  it 
was  not  foul,  and  at  times  they  felt  currents  of  cooler  air  upon 
their  faces,  issuing  from  half-guessed  openings  in  the  walls. 
There  were  many  of  these.  In  the  pale  ray  of  the  wizard’s 
staff,  Frodo  caught  glimpses  of  stairs  and  arches,  and  of  other 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


405 


passages  and  tunnels,  sloping  up,  or  running  steeply  down, 
or  opening  blankly  dark  on  either  side.  It  was  bewildering 
beyond  hope  of  remembering. 

Gimli  aided  Gandalf  very  little,  except  by  his  stout  courage. 
At  least  he  was  not,  as  were  most  of  the  others,  troubled  by 
the  mere  darkness  in  itself.  Often  the  wizard  consulted  him 
at  points  where  the  choice  of  way  was  doubtful;  but  it  was 
always  Gandalf  who  had  the  final  word.  The  Mines  of  Moria 
were  vast  and  intricate  beyond  the  imagination  of  Gimli, 
Gloin’s  son,  dwarf  of  the  mountain-race  though  he  was.  To 
Gandalf  the  far-off  memories  of  a  journey  long  before  were 
now  of  little  help,  but  even  in  the  gloom  and  despite  all 
windings  of  the  road  he  knew  whither  he  wished  to  go,  and 
he  did  not  falter,  as  long  as  there  was  a  path  that  led  towards 
his  goal. 

‘Do  not  be  afraid!’  said  Aragorn.  There  was  a  pause  longer 
than  usual,  and  Gandalf  and  Gimli  were  whispering  together; 
the  others  were  crowded  behind,  waiting  anxiously.  ‘Do  not 
be  afraid!  I  have  been  with  him  on  many  a  journey,  if  never 
on  one  so  dark;  and  there  are  tales  in  Rivendell  of  greater 
deeds  of  his  than  any  that  I  have  seen.  He  will  not  go  astray 
-  if  there  is  any  path  to  find.  He  has  led  us  in  here  against 
our  fears,  but  he  will  lead  us  out  again,  at  whatever  cost  to 
himself.  He  is  surer  of  finding  the  way  home  in  a  blind  night 
than  the  cats  of  Queen  Beruthiel.’ 

It  was  well  for  the  Company  that  they  had  such  a  guide. 
They  had  no  fuel  nor  any  means  of  malting  torches;  in  the 
desperate  scramble  at  the  doors  many  things  had  been  left 
behind.  But  without  any  light  they  would  soon  have  come  to 
grief.  There  were  not  only  many  roads  to  choose  from,  there 
were  also  in  many  places  holes  and  pitfalls,  and  dark  wells 
beside  the  path  in  which  their  passing  feet  echoed.  There 
were  fissures  and  chasms  in  the  walls  and  floor,  and  every 
now  and  then  a  crack  would  open  right  before  their  feet.  The 
widest  was  more  than  seven  feet  across,  and  it  was  long 
before  Pippin  could  summon  enough  courage  to  leap  over 


406  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

the  dreadful  gap.  The  noise  of  churning  water  came  up  from 
far  below,  as  if  some  great  mill-wheel  was  turning  in  the 
depths. 

‘Rope!’  muttered  Sam.  ‘I  knew  I’d  want  it,  if  I  hadn’t  got  it!’ 

As  these  dangers  became  more  frequent  their  march 
became  slower.  Already  they  seemed  to  have  been  tramping 
on,  on,  endlessly  to  the  mountains’  roots.  They  were  more 
than  weary,  and  yet  there  seemed  no  comfort  in  the  thought 
of  halting  anywhere.  Frodo’s  spirits  had  risen  for  a  while  after 
his  escape,  and  after  food  and  a  draught  of  the  cordial;  but 
now  a  deep  uneasiness,  growing  to  dread,  crept  over  him 
again.  Though  he  had  been  healed  in  Rivendell  of  the  knife- 
stroke,  that  grim  wound  had  not  been  without  effect.  His 
senses  were  sharper  and  more  aware  of  things  that  could  not 
be  seen.  One  sign  of  change  that  he  soon  had  noticed  was 
that  he  could  see  more  in  the  dark  than  any  of  his  com¬ 
panions,  save  perhaps  Gandalf.  And  he  was  in  any  case  the 
bearer  of  the  Ring:  it  hung  upon  its  chain  against  his  breast, 
and  at  whiles  it  seemed  a  heavy  weight.  He  felt  the  certainty 
of  evil  ahead  and  of  evil  following;  but  he  said  nothing.  He 
gripped  tighter  on  the  hilt  of  his  sword  and  went  on  doggedly. 

The  Company  behind  him  spoke  seldom,  and  then  only  in 
hurried  whispers.  There  was  no  sound  but  the  sound  of  their 
own  feet:  the  dull  stump  of  Gimli’s  dwarf-boots;  the  heavy 
tread  of  Boromir;  the  light  step  of  Legolas;  the  soft,  scarce- 
heard  patter  of  hobbit-feet;  and  in  the  rear  the  slow  firm 
footfalls  of  Aragorn  with  his  long  stride.  When  they  halted 
for  a  moment  they  heard  nothing  at  all,  unless  it  were 
occasionally  a  faint  trickle  and  drip  of  unseen  water.  Yet 
Frodo  began  to  hear,  or  to  imagine  that  he  heard,  something 
else:  like  the  faint  fall  of  soft  bare  feet.  It  was  never  loud 
enough,  or  near  enough,  for  him  to  feel  certain  that  he  heard 
it;  but  once  it  had  started  it  never  stopped,  while  the  Company 
was  moving.  But  it  was  not  an  echo,  for  when  they  halted  it 
pattered  on  for  a  little  all  by  itself,  and  then  grew  still. 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


407 


It  was  after  nightfall  when  they  had  entered  the  Mines. 
They  had  been  going  for  several  hours  with  only  brief  halts, 
when  Gandalf  came  to  his  first  serious  check.  Before  him 
stood  a  wide  dark  arch  opening  into  three  passages:  all  led  in 
the  same  general  direction,  eastwards;  but  the  left-hand  pass¬ 
age  plunged  down,  while  the  right-hand  climbed  up,  and  the 
middle  way  seemed  to  run  on,  smooth  and  level  but  very 
narrow. 

‘I  have  no  memory  of  this  place  at  all!’  said  Gandalf,  stand¬ 
ing  uncertainly  under  the  arch.  He  held  up  his  staff  in  the 
hope  of  finding  some  marks  or  inscription  that  might  help 
his  choice;  but  nothing  of  the  kind  was  to  be  seen.  ‘I  am  too 
weary  to  decide,’  he  said,  shaking  his  head.  ‘And  I  expect 
that  you  are  all  as  weary  as  I  am,  or  wearier.  We  had  better 
halt  here  for  what  is  left  of  the  night.  You  know  what  I  mean! 
In  here  it  is  ever  dark;  but  outside  the  late  Moon  is  riding 
westward  and  the  middle -night  has  passed.’ 

‘Poor  old  Bill!’  said  Sam.  ‘I  wonder  where  he  is.  I  hope 
those  wolves  haven’t  got  him  yet.  ’ 

To  the  left  of  the  great  arch  they  found  a  stone  door:  it 
was  half  closed,  but  swung  back  easily  to  a  gentle  thrust. 
Beyond  there  seemed  to  lie  a  wide  chamber  cut  in  the  rock. 

‘Steady!  Steady!’  cried  Gandalf,  as  Merry  and  Pippin 
pushed  forward,  glad  to  find  a  place  where  they  could  rest 
with  at  least  more  feeling  of  shelter  than  in  the  open  passage. 
‘Steady!  You  do  not  know  what  is  inside  yet.  I  will  go  first.’ 

He  went  in  cautiously,  and  the  others  filed  behind.  ‘There!’ 
he  said,  pointing  with  his  staff  to  the  middle  of  the  floor. 
Before  his  feet  they  saw  a  large  round  hole  like  the  mouth  of 
a  well.  Broken  and  rusty  chains  lay  at  the  edge  and  trailed 
down  into  the  black  pit.  Fragments  of  stone  lay  near. 

‘One  of  you  might  have  fallen  in  and  still  be  wondering 
when  you  were  going  to  strike  the  bottom,’  said  Aragorn  to 
Merry.  ‘Let  the  guide  go  first  while  you  have  one.’ 

‘This  seems  to  have  been  a  guardroom,  made  for  the 
watching  of  the  three  passages,’  said  Gimli.  ‘That  hole  was 
plainly  a  well  for  the  guards’  use,  covered  with  a  stone  lid. 


408  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

But  the  lid  is  broken,  and  we  must  all  take  care  in  the  dark.’ 

Pippin  felt  curiously  attracted  by  the  well.  While  the  others 
were  unrolling  blankets  and  malting  beds  against  the  walls  of 
the  chamber,  as  far  as  possible  from  the  hole  in  the  floor,  he 
crept  to  the  edge  and  peered  over.  A  chill  air  seemed  to  strike 
his  face,  rising  from  invisible  depths.  Moved  by  a  sudden 
impulse  he  groped  for  a  loose  stone,  and  let  it  drop.  He  felt 
his  heart  beat  many  times  before  there  was  any  sound.  Then 
far  below,  as  if  the  stone  had  fallen  into  deep  water  in  some 
cavernous  place,  there  came  a  plunk ,  very  distant,  but  magni¬ 
fied  and  repeated  in  the  hollow  shaft. 

What’s  that?’  cried  Gandalf.  He  was  relieved  when  Pippin 
confessed  what  he  had  done;  but  he  was  angry,  and  Pippin 
could  see  his  eye  glinting.  ‘Fool  of  a  Took!’  he  growled. 
‘This  is  a  serious  journey,  not  a  hobbit  walking-party.  Throw 
yourself  in  next  time,  and  then  you  will  be  no  further  nuis¬ 
ance.  Now  be  quiet!’ 

Nothing  more  was  heard  for  several  minutes;  but  then 
there  came  out  of  the  depths  faint  knocks:  tom-tap ,  tap-tom. 
They  stopped,  and  when  the  echoes  had  died  away,  they 
were  repeated:  tap-tom ,  tom-tap ,  tap-tap,  tom.  They  sounded 
disquietingly  like  signals  of  some  sort;  but  after  a  while  the 
knocking  died  away  and  was  not  heard  again. 

‘That  was  the  sound  of  a  hammer,  or  I  have  never  heard 
one,’  said  Gimli. 

‘Yes,’  said  Gandalf,  ‘and  I  do  not  like  it.  It  may  have 
nothing  to  do  with  Peregrin’s  foolish  stone;  but  probably 
something  has  been  disturbed  that  would  have  been  better 
left  quiet.  Pray,  do  nothing  of  the  land  again!  Let  us  hope  we 
shall  get  some  rest  without  further  trouble.  You,  Pippin,  can 
go  on  the  first  watch,  as  a  reward,’  he  growled,  as  he  rolled 
himself  in  a  blanket. 

Pippin  sat  miserably  by  the  door  in  the  pitch  dark;  but  he 
kept  on  turning  round,  fearing  that  some  unknown  thing 
would  crawl  up  out  of  the  well.  He  wished  he  could  cover 
the  hole,  if  only  with  a  blanket,  but  he  dared  not  move  or  go 
near  it,  even  though  Gandalf  seemed  to  be  asleep. 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


409 


Actually  Gandalf  was  awake,  though  lying  still  and  silent. 
He  was  deep  in  thought,  trying  to  recall  every  memory  of 
his  former  journey  in  the  Mines,  and  considering  anxiously 
the  next  course  that  he  should  take;  a  false  turn  now  might 
be  disastrous.  After  an  hour  he  rose  up  and  came  over  to 
Pippin. 

‘Get  into  a  corner  and  have  a  sleep,  my  lad,’  he  said  in  a 
kindly  tone.  ‘You  want  to  sleep,  I  expect.  I  cannot  get  a  wink, 
so  I  may  as  well  do  the  watching.’ 

‘I  know  what  is  the  matter  with  me,’  he  muttered,  as  he  sat 
down  by  the  door.  ‘I  need  smoke!  I  have  not  tasted  it  since 
the  morning  before  the  snowstorm.’ 

The  last  thing  that  Pippin  saw,  as  sleep  took  him,  was  a 
dark  glimpse  of  the  old  wizard  huddled  on  the  floor,  shielding 
a  glowing  chip  in  his  gnarled  hands  between  his  knees.  The 
flicker  for  a  moment  showed  his  sharp  nose,  and  the  puff  of 
smoke. 

It  was  Gandalf  who  roused  them  all  from  sleep.  He  had 
sat  and  watched  all  alone  for  about  six  hours,  and  had  let  the 
others  rest.  ‘And  in  the  watches  I  have  made  up  my  mind,’ 
he  said.  ‘I  do  not  like  the  feel  of  the  middle  way;  and  I  do  not 
like  the  smell  of  the  left-hand  way:  there  is  foul  air  down 
there,  or  I  am  no  guide.  I  shall  take  the  right-hand  passage. 
It  is  time  we  began  to  climb  up  again.’ 

For  eight  dark  hours,  not  counting  two  brief  halts,  they 
marched  on;  and  they  met  no  danger,  and  heard  nothing, 
and  saw  nothing  but  the  faint  gleam  of  the  wizard’s  light, 
bobbing  like  a  will-o’-the-wisp  in  front  of  them.  The  passage 
they  had  chosen  wound  steadily  upwards.  As  far  as  they 
could  judge  it  went  in  great  mounting  curves,  and  as  it  rose 
it  grew  loftier  and  wider.  There  were  now  no  openings  to 
other  galleries  or  tunnels  on  either  side,  and  the  floor  was 
level  and  sound,  without  pits  or  cracks.  Evidently  they  had 
struck  what  once  had  been  an  important  road;  and  they  went 
forward  quicker  than  they  had  done  on  their  first  march. 

In  this  way  they  advanced  some  fifteen  miles,  measured  in 


410  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

a  direct  line  east,  though  they  must  have  actually  walked 
twenty  miles  or  more.  As  the  road  climbed  upwards,  Frodo’s 
spirits  rose  a  little;  but  he  still  felt  oppressed,  and  still  at  times 
he  heard,  or  thought  he  heard,  away  behind  the  Company 
and  beyond  the  fall  and  patter  of  their  feet,  a  following  foot¬ 
step  that  was  not  an  echo. 

They  had  marched  as  far  as  the  hobbits  could  endure 
without  a  rest,  and  all  were  thinking  of  a  place  where  they 
could  sleep,  when  suddenly  the  walls  to  right  and  left  van¬ 
ished.  They  seemed  to  have  passed  through  some  arched 
doorway  into  a  black  and  empty  space.  There  was  a  great 
draught  of  warmer  air  behind  them,  and  before  them  the 
darkness  was  cold  on  their  faces.  They  halted  and  crowded 
anxiously  together. 

Gandalf  seemed  pleased.  ‘I  chose  the  right  way,’  he  said. 
‘At  last  we  are  coming  to  the  habitable  parts,  and  I  guess  that 
we  are  not  far  now  from  the  eastern  side.  But  we  are  high 
up,  a  good  deal  higher  than  the  Dimrill  Gate,  unless  I  am 
mistaken.  From  the  feeling  of  the  air  we  must  be  in  a  wide 
hall.  I  will  now  risk  a  little  real  light.’ 

He  raised  his  staff,  and  for  a  brief  instant  there  was  a  blaze 
like  a  flash  of  lightning.  Great  shadows  sprang  up  and  fled, 
and  for  a  second  they  saw  a  vast  roof  far  above  their  heads 
upheld  by  many  mighty  pillars  hewn  of  stone.  Before  them 
and  on  either  side  stretched  a  huge  empty  hall;  its  black  walls, 
polished  and  smooth  as  glass,  flashed  and  glittered.  Three 
other  entrances  they  saw,  dark  black  arches:  one  straight 
before  them  eastwards,  and  one  on  either  side.  Then  the  light 
went  out. 

‘That  is  all  that  I  shall  venture  on  for  the  present,’  said 
Gandalf.  ‘There  used  to  be  great  windows  on  the  mountain¬ 
side,  and  shafts  leading  out  to  the  light  in  the  upper  reaches 
of  the  Mines.  I  think  we  have  reached  them  now,  but  it  is 
night  outside  again,  and  we  cannot  tell  until  morning.  If  I 
am  right,  tomorrow  we  may  actually  see  the  morning  peeping 
in.  But  in  the  meanwhile  we  had  better  go  no  further.  Let 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK  4II 

us  rest,  if  we  can.  Things  have  gone  well  so  far,  and  the 
greater  part  of  the  dark  road  is  over.  But  we  are  not  through 
yet,  and  it  is  a  long  way  down  to  the  Gates  that  open  on  the 
world.’ 

The  Company  spent  that  night  in  the  great  cavernous  hall, 
huddled  close  together  in  a  corner  to  escape  the  draught: 
there  seemed  to  be  a  steady  inflow  of  chill  air  through  the 
eastern  archway.  All  about  them  as  they  lay  hung  the  dark¬ 
ness,  hollow  and  immense,  and  they  were  oppressed  by  the 
loneliness  and  vastness  of  the  dolven  halls  and  endlessly 
branching  stairs  and  passages.  The  wildest  imaginings  that 
dark  rumour  had  ever  suggested  to  the  hobbits  fell  altogether 
short  of  the  actual  dread  and  wonder  of  Moria. 

‘There  must  have  been  a  mighty  crowd  of  dwarves  here  at 
one  time,’  said  Sam;  ‘and  every  one  of  them  busier  than 
badgers  for  five  hundred  years  to  make  all  this,  and  most  in 
hard  rock  too!  What  did  they  do  it  all  for?  They  didn’t  live 
in  these  darksome  holes  surely?’ 

‘These  are  not  holes,’  said  Gimli.  ‘This  is  the  great  realm 
and  city  of  the  Dwarrowdelf.  And  of  old  it  was  not  darksome, 
but  full  of  light  and  splendour,  as  is  still  remembered  in  our 
songs.’ 

He  rose  and  standing  in  the  dark  he  began  to  chant  in  a 
deep  voice,  while  the  echoes  ran  away  into  the  roof. 

The  world  was  young,  the  mountains  green, 

No  stain  yet  on  the  Moon  was  seen, 

No  words  were  laid  on  stream  or  stone 
When  Durin  woke  and  walked  alone. 

He  named  the  nameless  hills  and  dells; 

He  drank  from  yet  untasted  wells; 

He  stooped  and  looked  in  Mirrormere, 

And  saw  a  crown  of  stars  appear, 

As  gems  upon  a  silver  thread, 

Above  the  shadow  of  his  head. 


412 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


The  world  was  fair,  the  mountains  tall, 

In  Elder  Days  before  the  fall 
Of  mighty  kings  in  Nargothrond 
And  Gondolin,  who  now  beyond 
The  Western  Seas  have  passed  away: 

The  world  was  fair  in  Durin’s  Day. 

A  king  he  was  on  carven  throne 
In  many-pillared  halls  of  stone 
With  golden  roof  and  silver  floor, 

And  runes  of  power  upon  the  door. 

The  light  of  sun  and  star  and  moon 
In  shining  lamps  of  crystal  hewn 
Undimmed  by  cloud  or  shade  of  night 
There  shone  for  ever  fair  and  bright. 

There  hammer  on  the  anvil  smote, 

There  chisel  clove,  and  graver  wrote ; 

There  forged  was  blade,  and  bound  was  hilt; 
The  delver  mined,  the  mason  built. 

There  beryl,  pearl,  and  opal  pale, 

And  metal  wrought  like  fishes’  mail, 

Buckler  and  corslet,  axe  and  sword. 

And  shining  spears  were  laid  in  hoard. 

Unwearied  then  were  Durin  ’s  folk; 

Beneath  the  mountains  music  woke: 

The  harpers  harped,  the  minstrels  sang, 

And  at  the  gates  the  trumpets  rang. 

The  world  is  grey,  the  mountains  old, 

The  forge’s  fire  is  ashen-cold; 

No  harp  is  wrung,  no  hammer  falls: 

The  darkness  dwells  in  Durin’s  halls; 

The  shadow  lies  upon  his  tomb 
In  Moria,  in  Khazad-dum. 

But  still  the  sunken  stars  appear 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


413 


In  dark  and  windless  Mirrormere; 

There  lies  his  crown  in  water  deep, 

Till  Dnrin  wakes  again  from  sleep. 

‘I  like  that!’  said  Sam.  ‘I  should  like  to  learn  it.  In  Moria, 
in  Khazad-dum!  But  it  makes  the  darkness  seem  heavier, 
thinking  of  all  those  lamps.  Are  there  piles  of  jewels  and  gold 
lying  about  here  still?’ 

Gimli  was  silent.  Having  sung  his  song  he  would  say  no 
more. 

‘Piles  of  jewels?’  said  Gandalf.  ‘No.  The  Ores  have  often 
plundered  Moria;  there  is  nothing  left  in  the  upper  halls.  And 
since  the  dwarves  fled,  no  one  dares  to  seek  the  shafts  and 
treasuries  down  in  the  deep  places:  they  are  drowned  in  water 
-  or  in  a  shadow  of  fear.’ 

‘Then  what  do  the  dwarves  want  to  come  back  for?’  asked 
Sam. 

‘For  mithril ,’  answered  Gandalf.  ‘The  wealth  of  Moria  was 
not  in  gold  and  jewels,  the  toys  of  the  Dwarves;  nor  in  iron, 
their  servant.  Such  things  they  found  here,  it  is  true,  especially 
iron;  but  they  did  not  need  to  delve  for  them:  all  things  that 
they  desired  they  could  obtain  in  traffic.  For  here  alone  in 
the  world  was  found  Moria-silver,  or  true-silver  as  some  have 
called  it:  mithril  is  the  Elvish  name.  The  Dwarves  have  a 
name  which  they  do  not  tell.  Its  worth  was  ten  times  that  of 
gold,  and  now  it  is  beyond  price;  for  little  is  left  above  ground, 
and  even  the  Ores  dare  not  delve  here  for  it.  The  lodes  lead 
away  north  towards  Caradhras,  and  down  to  darkness.  The 
Dwarves  tell  no  tale;  but  even  as  mithril  was  the  foundation 
of  their  wealth,  so  also  it  was  their  destruction:  they  delved 
too  greedily  and  too  deep,  and  disturbed  that  from  which 
they  fled,  Durin’s  Bane.  Of  what  they  brought  to  light  the 
Ores  have  gathered  nearly  all,  and  given  it  in  tribute  to 
Sauron,  who  covets  it. 

‘ Mithril !  All  folk  desired  it.  It  could  be  beaten  like  copper, 
and  polished  like  glass;  and  the  Dwarves  could  make  of  it  a 
metal,  light  and  yet  harder  than  tempered  steel.  Its  beauty 


414 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


was  like  to  that  of  common  silver,  but  the  beauty  of  mithril 
did  not  tarnish  or  grow  dim.  The  Elves  dearly  loved  it,  and 
among  many  uses  they  made  of  it  ithildin ,  starmoon,  which 
you  saw  upon  the  doors.  Bilbo  had  a  corslet  of  mithril-rings 
that  Thorin  gave  him.  I  wonder  what  has  become  of  it? 
Gathering  dust  still  in  Michel  Delving  Mathom-house,  I 
suppose.’ 

‘What?’  cried  Gimli,  startled  out  of  his  silence.  ‘A  corslet 
of  Moria-silver?  That  was  a  kingly  gift!’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘I  never  told  him,  but  its  worth  was 
greater  than  the  value  of  the  whole  Shire  and  everything  in  it.  ’ 

Frodo  said  nothing,  but  he  put  his  hand  under  his  tunic 
and  touched  the  rings  of  his  mail-shirt.  He  felt  staggered  to 
think  that  he  had  been  walking  about  with  the  price  of  the 
Shire  under  his  jacket.  Had  Bilbo  known?  He  felt  no  doubt 
that  Bilbo  knew  quite  well.  It  was  indeed  a  kingly  gift.  But 
now  his  thoughts  had  been  carried  away  from  the  dark  Mines, 
to  Rivendell,  to  Bilbo,  and  to  Bag  End  in  the  days  while  Bilbo 
was  still  there.  He  wished  with  all  his  heart  that  he  was  back 
there,  and  in  those  days,  mowing  the  lawn,  or  pottering 
among  the  flowers,  and  that  he  had  never  heard  of  Moria,  or 
mithril  -  or  the  Ring. 

A  deep  silence  fell.  One  by  one  the  others  fell  asleep.  Frodo 
was  on  guard.  As  if  it  were  a  breath  that  came  in  through 
unseen  doors  out  of  deep  places,  dread  came  over  him.  His 
hands  were  cold  and  his  brow  damp.  He  listened.  All  his 
mind  was  given  to  listening  and  nothing  else  for  two  slow 
hours;  but  he  heard  no  sound,  not  even  the  imagined  echo 
of  a  footfall. 

His  watch  was  nearly  over,  when,  far  off  where  he  guessed 
that  the  western  archway  stood,  he  fancied  that  he  could  see 
two  pale  points  of  light,  almost  like  luminous  eyes.  He  started. 
His  head  had  nodded.  ‘I  must  have  nearly  fallen  asleep  on 
guard,’  he  thought.  ‘I  was  on  the  edge  of  a  dream.’  He  stood 
up  and  rubbed  his  eyes,  and  remained  standing,  peering  into 
the  dark,  until  he  was  relieved  by  Legolas. 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


415 


When  he  lay  down  he  quickly  went  to  sleep,  but  it  seemed 
to  him  that  the  dream  went  on:  he  heard  whispers,  and  saw 
the  two  pale  points  of  light  approaching,  slowly.  He  woke 
and  found  that  the  others  were  speaking  softly  near  him,  and 
that  a  dim  light  was  falling  on  his  face.  High  up  above  the 
eastern  archway  through  a  shaft  near  the  roof  came  a  long 
pale  gleam;  and  across  the  hall  through  the  northern  arch 
light  also  glimmered  faint  and  distantly. 

Frodo  sat  up.  ‘Good  morning!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘For  morning 
it  is  again  at  last.  I  was  right,  you  see.  We  are  high  up  on  the 
east  side  of  Moria.  Before  today  is  over  we  ought  to  find 
the  Great  Gates  and  see  the  waters  of  Mirrormere  lying  in 
the  Dimrill  Dale  before  us.’ 

‘I  shall  be  glad,’  said  Gimli.  ‘I  have  looked  on  Moria,  and 
it  is  very  great,  but  it  has  become  dark  and  dreadful;  and  we 
have  found  no  sign  of  my  kindred.  I  doubt  now  that  Balin 
ever  came  here.’ 

After  they  had  breakfasted  Gandalf  decided  to  go  on  again 
at  once.  We  are  tired,  but  we  shall  rest  better  when  we  are 
outside,’  he  said.  ‘I  think  that  none  of  us  will  wish  to  spend 
another  night  in  Moria.’ 

‘No  indeed!’  said  Boromir.  Which  way  shall  we  take? 
Yonder  eastward  arch?’ 

‘Maybe,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘But  I  do  not  know  yet  exactly 
where  we  are.  Unless  I  am  quite  astray,  I  guess  that  we  are 
above  and  to  the  north  of  the  Great  Gates;  and  it  may  not  be 
easy  to  find  the  right  road  down  to  them.  The  eastern  arch 
will  probably  prove  to  be  the  way  that  we  must  take;  but 
before  we  make  up  our  minds  we  ought  to  look  about  us.  Let 
us  go  towards  that  light  in  the  north  door.  If  we  could  find  a 
window  it  would  help,  but  I  fear  that  the  light  comes  only 
down  deep  shafts.’ 

Following  his  lead  the  Company  passed  under  the  northern 
arch.  They  found  themselves  in  a  wide  corridor.  As  they  went 
along  it  the  glimmer  grew  stronger,  and  they  saw  that  it  came 
through  a  doorway  on  their  right.  It  was  high  and  flat-topped, 


416  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

and  the  stone  door  was  still  upon  its  hinges,  standing  half 
open.  Beyond  it  was  a  large  square  chamber.  It  was  dimly  lit, 
but  to  their  eyes,  after  so  long  a  time  in  the  dark,  it  seemed 
dazzlingly  bright,  and  they  blinked  as  they  entered. 

Their  feet  disturbed  a  deep  dust  upon  the  floor,  and 
stumbled  among  things  lying  in  the  doorway  whose  shapes 
they  could  not  at  first  make  out.  The  chamber  was  lit  by  a 
wide  shaft  high  in  the  further  eastern  wall;  it  slanted  upwards 
and,  far  above,  a  small  square  patch  of  blue  sky  could  be 
seen.  The  light  of  the  shaft  fell  directly  on  a  table  in  the 
middle  of  the  room:  a  single  oblong  block,  about  two  feet 
high,  upon  which  was  laid  a  great  slab  of  white  stone. 

‘It  looks  like  a  tomb,’  muttered  Frodo,  and  bent  forwards 
with  a  curious  sense  of  foreboding,  to  look  more  closely  at  it. 
Gandalf  came  quickly  to  his  side.  On  the  slab  runes  were 
deeply  graven: 


khm 


A  JOURNEY  IN  THE  DARK 


417 


‘These  are  Daeron’s  Runes,  such  as  were  used  of  old  in 
Moria,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘Here  is  written  in  the  tongues  of  Men 
and  Dwarves: 


BALIN  SON  OF  FUNDIN 
LORD  OF  MORIA.’ 

‘He  is  dead  then,’  said  Frodo.  ‘I  feared  it  was  so.’  Gimli 
cast  his  hood  over  his  face. 


Chapter  5 


THE  BRIDGE  OF  KHAZAD-DUM 


The  Company  of  the  Ring  stood  silent  beside  the  tomb  of 
Balin.  Frodo  thought  of  Bilbo  and  his  long  friendship  with 
the  dwarf,  and  of  Balin’s  visit  to  the  Shire  long  ago.  In  that 
dusty  chamber  in  the  mountains  it  seemed  a  thousand  years 
ago  and  on  the  other  side  of  the  world. 

At  length  they  stirred  and  looked  up,  and  began  to  search 
for  anything  that  would  give  them  tidings  of  Balin’s  fate,  or 
show  what  had  become  of  his  folk.  There  was  another  smaller 
door  on  the  other  side  of  the  chamber,  under  the  shaft.  By 
both  the  doors  they  could  now  see  that  many  bones  were 
lying,  and  among  them  were  broken  swords  and  axe-heads, 
and  cloven  shields  and  helms.  Some  of  the  swords  were 
crooked:  orc-scimitars  with  blackened  blades. 

There  were  many  recesses  cut  in  the  rock  of  the  walls,  and 
in  them  were  large  iron-bound  chests  of  wood.  All  had 
been  broken  and  plundered;  but  beside  the  shattered  lid  of 
one  there  lay  the  remains  of  a  book.  It  had  been  slashed 
and  stabbed  and  partly  burned,  and  it  was  so  stained  with 
black  and  other  dark  marks  like  old  blood  that  little  of  it 
could  be  read.  Gandalf  lifted  it  carefully,  but  the  leaves 
cracked  and  broke  as  he  laid  it  on  the  slab.  He  pored  over 
it  for  some  time  without  speaking.  Frodo  and  Gimli  stand¬ 
ing  at  his  side  could  see,  as  he  gingerly  turned  the  leaves, 
that  they  were  written  by  many  different  hands,  in  runes, 
both  of  Moria  and  of  Dale,  and  here  and  there  in  Elvish 
script. 

At  last  Gandalf  looked  up.  ‘It  seems  to  be  a  record  of  the 
fortunes  of  Balin’s  folk,’  he  said.  ‘I  guess  that  it  began  with 
their  coming  to  Dimrill  Dale  nigh  on  thirty  years  ago:  the 
pages  seem  to  have  numbers  referring  to  the  years  after  their 


THE  BRIDGE  OF  KHAZAD-DUM  419 

arrival.  The  top  page  is  marked  one  -  three,  so  at  least  two 
are  missing  from  the  beginning.  Listen  to  this! 

‘  We  drove  out  ores  from  the  great  gate  and  guard  -  I  think; 
the  next  word  is  blurred  and  burned:  probably  room  -  we  slew 
many  in  the  bright  -  I  think  -  sun  in  the  dale.  Floi  was  killed  by 
an  arrow.  He  slew  the  great.  Then  there  is  a  blur  followed  by 
Floi  under  grass  near  Mirror  mere.  The  next  line  or  two  I 
cannot  read.  Then  comes  We  have  taken  the  twentyfirst  hall 
of  North  end  to  dwell  in.  There  is  I  cannot  read  what.  A  shaft 
is  mentioned.  Then  Balin  has  set  up  his  seat  in  the  Chamber  of 
MazarbuV 

‘The  Chamber  of  Records,’  said  Gimli.  ‘I  guess  that  is 
where  we  now  stand.’ 

‘Well,  I  can  read  no  more  for  a  long  way,’  said  Gandalf, 
‘except  the  word  gold,  and  Dunn’s  Axe  and  something  helm. 
Then  Balin  is  now  lord  ofMoria.  That  seems  to  end  a  chapter. 
After  some  stars  another  hand  begins,  and  I  can  see  we  found 
truesilver,  and  later  the  word  wellforged,  and  then  something, 
I  have  it!  mithril',  and  the  last  two  lines  Oin  to  seek  for  the  upper 
armouries  of  Third  Deep,  something  go  westwards,  a  blur,  to 
Hollin  gate.’ 

Gandalf  paused  and  set  a  few  leaves  aside.  ‘There  are 
several  pages  of  the  same  sort,  rather  hastily  written  and 
much  damaged,’  he  said;  ‘but  I  can  make  little  of  them  in  this 
light.  Now  there  must  be  a  number  of  leaves  missing,  because 
they  begin  to  be  numbered  five,  the  fifth  year  of  the  colony, 
I  suppose.  Let  me  see!  No,  they  are  too  cut  and  stained;  I 
cannot  read  them.  We  might  do  better  in  the  sunlight.  Wait! 
Here  is  something:  a  large  bold  hand  using  an  Elvish  script.’ 

‘That  would  be  Ori’s  hand,’  said  Gimli,  looking  over  the 
wizard’s  arm.  ‘He  could  write  well  and  speedily,  and  often 
used  the  Elvish  characters.’ 

‘I  fear  he  had  ill  tidings  to  record  in  a  fair  hand,’  said 
Gandalf.  ‘The  first  clear  word  is  sorrow,  but  the  rest  of  the 
line  is  lost,  unless  it  ends  in  estre.  Yes,  it  must  be  yestre 
followed  by  day  being  the  tenth  ofnovembre  Balin  lord  ofMoria 


420  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

fell  in  Dimrill  Dale.  He  went  alone  to  look  in  Mirror  mere,  an 
ore  shot  him  from  behind  a  stone,  we  slew  the  ore,  but  many  more 
.  .  .  up  from  east  up  the  Silverlode.  The  remainder  of  the  page 
is  so  blurred  that  I  can  hardly  make  anything  out,  but  I  think 
I  can  read  we  have  barred  the  gates,  and  then  can  hold  them 
long  if  and  then  perhaps  horrible  and  suffer.  Poor  Balin!  He 
seems  to  have  kept  the  title  that  he  took  for  less  than  five 
years.  I  wonder  what  happened  afterwards;  but  there  is  no 
time  to  puzzle  out  the  last  few  pages.  Here  is  the  last  page  of 
all.’  He  paused  and  sighed. 

‘It  is  grim  reading,’  he  said.  ‘I  fear  their  end  was  cruel. 
Listen!  We  cannot  get  out.  We  cannot  get  out.  They  have  taken 
the  Bridge  and  second  hall.  Frar  and  Loni  and  Nali  fell  there. 
Then  there  are  four  lines  smeared  so  that  I  can  only  read 
went  5  days  ago.  The  last  lines  run  the  pool  is  up  to  the  wall 
at  Westgate.  The  Watcher  in  the  Water  took  Oin.  We  cannot 
get  out.  The  end  comes,  and  then  drums,  drums  in  the  deep.  I 
wonder  what  that  means.  The  last  thing  written  is  in  a  trailing 
scrawl  of  elf-letters:  they  are  coming.  There  is  nothing  more.’ 
Gandalf  paused  and  stood  in  silent  thought. 

A  sudden  dread  and  a  horror  of  the  chamber  fell  on  the 
Company.  ‘We  cannot  get  out,’  muttered  Gimli.  ‘It  was  well 
for  us  that  the  pool  had  sunk  a  little,  and  that  the  Watcher 
was  sleeping  down  at  the  southern  end.’ 

Gandalf  raised  his  head  and  looked  round.  ‘They  seem  to 
have  made  a  last  stand  by  both  doors,’  he  said;  ‘but  there 
were  not  many  left  by  that  time.  So  ended  the  attempt  to 
retake  Moria!  It  was  valiant  but  foolish.  The  time  is  not  come 
yet.  Now,  I  fear,  we  must  say  farewell  to  Balin  son  of  Fundin. 
Here  he  must  lie  in  the  halls  of  his  fathers.  We  will  take  this 
book,  the  Book  of  Mazarbul,  and  look  at  it  more  closely  later. 
You  had  better  keep  it,  Gimli,  and  take  it  back  to  Dain,  if 
you  get  a  chance.  It  will  interest  him,  though  it  will  grieve 
him  deeply.  Come,  let  us  go!  The  morning  is  passing.’ 

‘Which  way  shall  we  go?’  asked  Boromir. 

‘Back  to  the  hall,’  answered  Gandalf.  ‘But  our  visit  to  this 
room  has  not  been  in  vain.  I  now  know  where  we  are.  This 


THE  BRIDGE  OF  ICHAZAD-DUM 


421 


must  be,  as  Gimli  says,  the  Chamber  of  Mazarbul;  and  the 
hall  must  be  the  twenty-first  of  the  North-end.  Therefore  we 
should  leave  by  the  eastern  arch  of  the  hall,  and  bear  right 
and  south,  and  go  downwards.  The  Twenty-first  Hall  should 
be  on  the  Seventh  Level,  that  is  six  above  the  level  of  the 
Gates.  Come  now!  Back  to  the  hall!’ 

Gandalf  had  hardly  spoken  these  words,  when  there  came 
a  great  noise:  a  rolling  Boom  that  seemed  to  come  from  depths 
far  below,  and  to  tremble  in  the  stone  at  their  feet.  They 
sprang  towards  the  door  in  alarm.  Doom ,  doom  it  rolled  again, 
as  if  huge  hands  were  turning  the  very  caverns  of  Moria  into  a 
vast  drum.  Then  there  came  an  echoing  blast:  a  great  horn  was 
blown  in  the  hall,  and  answering  horns  and  harsh  cries  were 
heard  further  off.  There  was  a  hurrying  sound  of  many  feet. 

‘They  are  coming!’  cried  Legolas. 

‘We  cannot  get  out,’  said  Gimli. 

‘Trapped!’  cried  Gandalf.  ‘Why  did  I  delay?  Here  we  are, 
caught,  just  as  they  were  before.  But  I  was  not  here  then.  We 
will  see  what - ’ 

Doom ,  doom  came  the  drum-beat  and  the  walls  shook. 

‘Slam  the  doors  and  wedge  them!’  shouted  Aragorn.  ‘And 
keep  your  packs  on  as  long  as  you  can:  we  may  get  a  chance 
to  cut  our  way  out  yet.’ 

‘No!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘We  must  not  get  shut  in.  Keep  the 
east  door  ajar!  We  will  go  that  way,  if  we  get  a  chance.’ 

Another  harsh  horn-call  and  shrill  cries  rang  out.  Feet  were 
coming  down  the  corridor.  There  was  a  ring  and  clatter  as 
the  Company  drew  their  swords.  Glamdring  shone  with  a 
pale  light,  and  Sting  glinted  at  the  edges.  Boromir  set  his 
shoulder  against  the  western  door. 

Wait  a  moment!  Do  not  close  it  yet!’  said  Gandalf.  He 
sprang  forward  to  Boromir’s  side  and  drew  himself  up  to  his 
full  height. 

‘Who  comes  hither  to  disturb  the  rest  of  Balin  Lord  of 
Moria?’  he  cried  in  a  loud  voice. 

There  was  a  rush  of  hoarse  laughter,  like  the  fall  of  sliding 


422 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


stones  into  a  pit;  amid  the  clamour  a  deep  voice  was  raised 
in  command.  Doom,  boom,  doom  went  the  drums  in  the  deep. 

With  a  quick  movement  Gandalf  stepped  before  the  nar¬ 
row  opening  of  the  door  and  thrust  forward  his  staff.  There 
was  a  dazzling  flash  that  lit  the  chamber  and  the  passage 
outside.  For  an  instant  the  wizard  looked  out.  Arrows  whined 
and  whistled  down  the  corridor  as  he  sprang  back. 

‘There  are  Ores,  very  many  of  them,’  he  said.  ‘And  some 
are  large  and  evil:  black  Uruks  of  Mordor.  For  the  moment 
they  are  hanging  back,  but  there  is  something  else  there.  A 
great  cave -troll,  I  think,  or  more  than  one.  There  is  no  hope 
of  escape  that  way.’ 

‘And  no  hope  at  all,  if  they  come  at  the  other  door  as  well,’ 
said  Boromir. 

‘There  is  no  sound  outside  here  yet,’  said  Aragorn,  who 
was  standing  by  the  eastern  door  listening.  ‘The  passage  on 
this  side  plunges  straight  down  a  stair:  it  plainly  does  not  lead 
back  towards  the  hall.  But  it  is  no  good  flying  blindly  this 
way  with  the  pursuit  just  behind.  We  cannot  block  the  door. 
Its  key  is  gone  and  the  lock  is  broken,  and  it  opens  inwards. 
We  must  do  something  to  delay  the  enemy  first.  We  will 
make  them  fear  the  Chamber  of  Mazarbul!’  he  said  grimly, 
feeling  the  edge  of  his  sword,  Anduril. 

Heavy  feet  were  heard  in  the  corridor.  Boromir  flung  him¬ 
self  against  the  door  and  heaved  it  to;  then  he  wedged  it  with 
broken  sword-blades  and  splinters  of  wood.  The  Company 
retreated  to  the  other  side  of  the  chamber.  But  they  had  no 
chance  to  fly  yet.  There  was  a  blow  on  the  door  that  made  it 
quiver;  and  then  it  began  to  grind  slowly  open,  driving  back 
the  wedges.  A  huge  arm  and  shoulder,  with  a  dark  skin  of 
greenish  scales,  was  thrust  through  the  widening  gap.  Then 
a  great,  flat,  toeless  foot  was  forced  through  below.  There 
was  a  dead  silence  outside. 

Boromir  leaped  forward  and  hewed  at  the  arm  with  all  his 
might;  but  his  sword  rang,  glanced  aside,  and  fell  from  his 
shaken  hand.  The  blade  was  notched. 


THE  BRIDGE  OF  KHAZAD-DUM  423 

Suddenly,  and  to  his  own  surprise,  Frodo  felt  a  hot  wrath 
blaze  up  in  his  heart.  ‘The  Shire!’  he  cried,  and  springing 
beside  Boromir,  he  stooped,  and  stabbed  with  Sting  at  the 
hideous  foot.  There  was  a  bellow,  and  the  foot  jerked  back, 
nearly  wrenching  Sting  from  Frodo’s  arm.  Black  drops 
dripped  from  the  blade  and  smoked  on  the  floor.  Boromir 
hurled  himself  against  the  door  and  slammed  it  again. 

‘One  for  the  Shire!’  cried  Aragorn.  ‘The  hobbit’s  bite  is 
deep!  You  have  a  good  blade,  Frodo  son  of  Drogo!’ 

There  was  a  crash  on  the  door,  followed  by  crash  after 
crash.  Rams  and  hammers  were  beating  against  it.  It  cracked 
and  staggered  back,  and  the  opening  grew  suddenly  wide. 
Arrows  came  whistling  in,  but  struck  the  northern  wall,  and 
fell  harmlessly  to  the  floor.  There  was  a  horn-blast  and  a  rush 
of  feet,  and  ores  one  after  another  leaped  into  the  chamber. 

How  many  there  were  the  Company  could  not  count.  The 
affray  was  sharp,  but  the  ores  were  dismayed  by  the  fierceness 
of  the  defence.  Legolas  shot  two  through  the  throat.  Gimli 
hewed  the  legs  from  under  another  that  had  sprung  up  on 
Balin’s  tomb.  Boromir  and  Aragorn  slew  many.  When  thir¬ 
teen  had  fallen  the  rest  fled  shrieking,  leaving  the  defenders 
unharmed,  except  for  Sam  who  had  a  scratch  along  the  scalp. 
A  quick  duck  had  saved  him;  and  he  had  felled  his  ore:  a 
sturdy  thrust  with  his  Barrow-blade.  A  fire  was  smouldering 
in  his  brown  eyes  that  would  have  made  Ted  Sandyman  step 
backwards,  if  he  had  seen  it. 

‘Now  is  the  time!’  cried  Gandalf.  ‘Let  us  go,  before  the 
troll  returns!’ 

But  even  as  they  retreated,  and  before  Pippin  and  Merry 
had  reached  the  stair  outside,  a  huge  orc-chieftain,  almost 
man-high,  clad  in  black  mail  from  head  to  foot,  leaped  into 
the  chamber;  behind  him  his  followers  clustered  in  the  door¬ 
way.  His  broad  flat  face  was  swart,  his  eyes  were  like  coals, 
and  his  tongue  was  red;  he  wielded  a  great  spear.  With  a 
thrust  of  his  huge  hide  shield  he  turned  Boromir’s  sword  and 
bore  him  backwards,  throwing  him  to  the  ground.  Diving 
under  Aragorn’s  blow  with  the  speed  of  a  striking  snake  he 


424  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

charged  into  the  Company  and  thrust  with  his  spear  straight 
at  Frodo.  The  blow  caught  him  on  the  right  side,  and  Frodo 
was  hurled  against  the  wall  and  pinned.  Sam,  with  a  cry, 
hacked  at  the  spear-shaft,  and  it  broke.  But  even  as  the  ore 
flung  down  the  truncheon  and  swept  out  his  scimitar,  Anduril 
came  down  upon  his  helm.  There  was  a  flash  like  flame  and 
the  helm  burst  asunder.  The  ore  fell  with  cloven  head.  His 
followers  fled  howling,  as  Boromir  and  Aragorn  sprang  at 
them. 

Doom ,  doom  went  the  drums  in  the  deep.  The  great  voice 
rolled  out  again. 

‘Now!’  shouted  Gandalf.  ‘Now  is  the  last  chance.  Run 
for  it!’ 

Aragorn  picked  up  Frodo  where  he  lay  by  the  wall  and 
made  for  the  stair,  pushing  Merry  and  Pippin  in  front  of  him. 
The  others  followed;  but  Gimli  had  to  be  dragged  away  by 
Legolas:  in  spite  of  the  peril  he  lingered  by  Balin’ s  tomb  with 
his  head  bowed.  Boromir  hauled  the  eastern  door  to,  grinding 
upon  its  hinges:  it  had  great  iron  rings  on  either  side,  but 
could  not  be  fastened. 

‘I  am  all  right,’  gasped  Frodo.  ‘I  can  walk.  Put  me  down!’ 

Aragorn  nearly  dropped  him  in  his  amazement.  ‘I  thought 
you  were  dead!’  he  cried. 

‘Not  yet!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘But  there  is  no  time  for  wonder. 
Off  you  go,  all  of  you,  down  the  stairs!  Wait  a  few  minutes 
for  me  at  the  bottom,  but  if  I  do  not  come  soon,  go  on!  Go 
quickly  and  choose  paths  leading  right  and  downwards.’ 

‘We  cannot  leave  you  to  hold  the  door  alone!’  said  Aragorn. 

‘Do  as  I  say!’  said  Gandalf  fiercely.  ‘Swords  are  no  more 
use  here.  Go!’ 

The  passage  was  lit  by  no  shaft  and  was  utterly  dark.  They 
groped  their  way  down  a  long  flight  of  steps,  and  then  looked 
back;  but  they  could  see  nothing,  except  high  above  them  the 
faint  glimmer  of  the  wizard’s  staff.  He  seemed  to  be  still 
standing  on  guard  by  the  closed  door.  Frodo  breathed  heavily 


THE  BRIDGE  OF  KHAZAD-DUM  425 

and  leaned  against  Sam,  who  put  his  arms  about  him.  They 
stood  peering  up  the  stairs  into  the  darkness.  Frodo  thought 
he  could  hear  the  voice  of  Gandalf  above,  muttering  words 
that  ran  down  the  sloping  roof  with  a  sighing  echo.  He  could 
not  catch  what  was  said.  The  walls  seemed  to  be  trembling. 
Every  now  and  again  the  drum-beats  throbbed  and  rolled: 
doom ,  doom. 

Suddenly  at  the  top  of  the  stair  there  was  a  stab  of  white 
light.  Then  there  was  a  dull  rumble  and  a  heavy  thud.  The 
drum-beats  broke  out  wildly:  doom-boom ,  doom-boom ,  and 
then  stopped.  Gandalf  came  flying  down  the  steps  and  fell  to 
the  ground  in  the  midst  of  the  Company. 

‘Well,  well!  That’s  over!’  said  the  wizard  struggling  to  his 
feet.  ‘I  have  done  all  that  I  could.  But  I  have  met  my  match, 
and  have  nearly  been  destroyed.  But  don’t  stand  here!  Go 
on!  You  will  have  to  do  without  light  for  a  while:  I  am  rather 
shaken.  Go  on!  Go  on!  Where  are  you,  Gimli?  Come  ahead 
with  me!  Keep  close  behind,  all  of  you!’ 

They  stumbled  after  him  wondering  what  had  happened. 
Doom ,  doom  went  the  drum-beats  again:  they  now  sounded 
muffled  and  far  away,  but  they  were  following.  There  was  no 
other  sound  of  pursuit,  neither  tramp  of  feet,  nor  any  voice. 
Gandalf  took  no  turns,  right  or  left,  for  the  passage  seemed 
to  be  going  in  the  direction  that  he  desired.  Every  now  and 
again  it  descended  a  flight  of  steps,  fifty  or  more,  to  a  lower 
level.  At  the  moment  that  was  their  chief  danger;  for  in  the 
dark  they  could  not  see  a  descent,  until  they  came  on  it  and 
put  their  feet  out  into  emptiness.  Gandalf  felt  the  ground 
with  his  staff  like  a  blind  man. 

At  the  end  of  an  hour  they  had  gone  a  mile,  or  maybe  a 
little  more,  and  had  descended  many  flights  of  stairs.  There 
was  still  no  sound  of  pursuit.  Almost  they  began  to  hope 
that  they  would  escape.  At  the  bottom  of  the  seventh  flight 
Gandalf  halted. 

‘It  is  getting  hot!’  he  gasped.  ‘We  ought  to  be  down  at  least 
to  the  level  of  the  Gates  now.  Soon  I  think  we  should  look 


426  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

for  a  left-hand  turn  to  take  us  east.  I  hope  it  is  not  far.  I  am 
very  weary.  I  must  rest  here  a  moment,  even  if  all  the  ores 
ever  spawned  are  after  us.’ 

Gimli  took  his  arm  and  helped  him  down  to  a  seat  on  the 
step.  ‘What  happened  away  up  there  at  the  door?’  he  asked. 
‘Did  you  meet  the  beater  of  the  drums?’ 

‘I  do  not  know,’  answered  Gandalf.  ‘But  I  found  myself 
suddenly  faced  by  something  that  I  have  not  met  before.  I 
could  think  of  nothing  to  do  but  to  try  and  put  a  shutting-spell 
on  the  door.  I  know  many;  but  to  do  things  of  that  kind 
rightly  requires  time,  and  even  then  the  door  can  be  broken 
by  strength. 

‘As  I  stood  there  I  could  hear  orc-voices  on  the  other  side: 
at  any  moment  I  thought  they  would  burst  it  open.  I  could 
not  hear  what  was  said;  they  seemed  to  be  talking  in  their 
own  hideous  language.  All  I  caught  was  ghask.  that  is  “fire”. 
Then  something  came  into  the  chamber  -  I  felt  it  through 
the  door,  and  the  ores  themselves  were  afraid  and  fell  silent. 
It  laid  hold  of  the  iron  ring,  and  then  it  perceived  me  and  my 
spell. 

‘What  it  was  I  cannot  guess,  but  I  have  never  felt  such  a 
challenge.  The  counter-spell  was  terrible.  It  nearly  broke  me. 
For  an  instant  the  door  left  my  control  and  began  to  open!  I 
had  to  speak  a  word  of  Command.  That  proved  too  great  a 
strain.  The  door  burst  in  pieces.  Something  dark  as  a  cloud 
was  blocking  out  all  the  light  inside,  and  I  was  thrown  back¬ 
wards  down  the  stairs.  All  the  wall  gave  way,  and  the  roof  of 
the  chamber  as  well,  I  think. 

‘I  am  afraid  Balin  is  buried  deep,  and  maybe  something 
else  is  buried  there  too.  I  cannot  say.  But  at  least  the  passage 
behind  us  was  completely  blocked.  Ah!  I  have  never  felt  so 
spent,  but  it  is  passing.  And  now  what  about  you,  Frodo? 
There  was  not  time  to  say  so,  but  I  have  never  been  more 
delighted  in  my  life  than  when  you  spoke.  I  feared  that  it  was 
a  brave  but  dead  hobbit  that  Aragorn  was  carrying.’ 

What  about  me?’  said  Frodo.  ‘I  am  alive,  and  whole  I 
think.  I  am  bruised  and  in  pain,  but  it  is  not  too  bad.’ 


THE  BRIDGE  OF  KHAZAD-DUM  427 

‘Well,’  said  Aragorn,  ‘I  can  only  say  that  hobbits  are  made 
of  a  stuff  so  tough  that  I  have  never  met  the  like  of  it.  Had  I 
known,  I  would  have  spoken  softer  in  the  Inn  at  Bree!  That 
spear-thrust  would  have  skewered  a  wild  boar!’ 

Well,  it  did  not  skewer  me,  I  am  glad  to  say,’  said  Frodo; 
‘though  I  feel  as  if  I  had  been  caught  between  a  hammer  and 
an  anvil.’  He  said  no  more.  He  found  breathing  painful. 

‘You  take  after  Bilbo,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘There  is  more  about 
you  than  meets  the  eye,  as  I  said  of  him  long  ago.’  Frodo 
wondered  if  the  remark  meant  more  than  it  said. 

They  now  went  on  again.  Before  long  Gimli  spoke.  He 
had  keen  eyes  in  the  dark.  ‘I  think,’  he  said,  ‘that  there  is  a 
light  ahead.  But  it  is  not  daylight.  It  is  red.  What  can  it  be?’ 

‘Ghash!’  muttered  Gandalf.  ‘I  wonder  if  that  is  what  they 
meant:  that  the  lower  levels  are  on  fire?  Still,  we  can  only 
go  on.’ 

Soon  the  light  became  unmistakable,  and  could  be  seen  by 
all.  It  was  flickering  and  glowing  on  the  walls  away  down  the 
passage  before  them.  They  could  now  see  their  way:  in  front 
the  road  sloped  down  swiftly,  and  some  way  ahead  there 
stood  a  low  archway;  through  it  the  growing  light  came.  The 
air  became  very  hot. 

When  they  came  to  the  arch  Gandalf  went  through,  signing 
to  them  to  wait.  As  he  stood  just  beyond  the  opening  they 
saw  his  face  lit  by  a  red  glow.  Quickly  he  stepped  back. 

‘There  is  some  new  devilry  here,’  he  said,  ‘devised  for  our 
welcome,  no  doubt.  But  I  know  now  where  we  are:  we  have 
reached  the  First  Deep,  the  level  immediately  below  the 
Gates.  This  is  the  Second  Hall  of  Old  Moria;  and  the  Gates 
are  near:  away  beyond  the  eastern  end,  on  the  left,  not  more 
than  a  quarter  of  a  mile.  Across  the  Bridge,  up  a  broad  stair, 
along  a  wide  road,  through  the  First  Hall,  and  out!  But  come 
and  look!’ 

They  peered  out.  Before  them  was  another  cavernous  hall. 
It  was  loftier  and  far  longer  than  the  one  in  which  they  had 
slept.  They  were  near  its  eastern  end;  westward  it  ran  away 


428  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

into  darkness.  Down  the  centre  stalked  a  double  line  of  tower¬ 
ing  pillars.  They  were  carved  like  boles  of  mighty  trees  whose 
boughs  upheld  the  roof  with  a  branching  tracery  of  stone. 
Their  stems  were  smooth  and  black,  but  a  red  glow  was 
darkly  mirrored  in  their  sides.  Right  across  the  floor,  close  to 
the  feet  of  two  huge  pillars  a  great  fissure  had  opened.  Out 
of  it  a  fierce  red  light  came,  and  now  and  again  flames  licked 
at  the  brink  and  curled  about  the  bases  of  the  columns.  Wisps 
of  dark  smoke  wavered  in  the  hot  air. 

‘If  we  had  come  by  the  main  road  down  from  the  upper 
halls,  we  should  have  been  trapped  here,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘Let 
us  hope  that  the  fire  now  lies  between  us  and  pursuit.  Come! 
There  is  no  time  to  lose.’ 

Even  as  he  spoke  they  heard  again  the  pursuing  drum-beat: 
Doom ,  doom ,  doom.  Away  beyond  the  shadows  at  the  western 
end  of  the  hall  there  came  cries  and  horn-calls.  Doom,  doom-. 
the  pillars  seemed  to  tremble  and  the  flames  to  quiver. 

‘Now  for  the  last  race!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘If  the  sun  is  shining 
outside,  we  may  still  escape.  After  me!’ 

He  turned  left  and  sped  across  the  smooth  floor  of  the  hall. 
The  distance  was  greater  than  it  had  looked.  As  they  ran  they 
heard  the  beat  and  echo  of  many  hurrying  feet  behind.  A 
shrill  yell  went  up:  they  had  been  seen.  There  was  a  ring  and 
clash  of  steel.  An  arrow  whistled  over  Frodo’s  head. 

Boromir  laughed.  ‘They  did  not  expect  this,’  he  said.  ‘The 
fire  has  cut  them  off.  We  are  on  the  wrong  side!’ 

‘Look  ahead!’  called  Gandalf.  ‘The  Bridge  is  near.  It  is 
dangerous  and  narrow.’ 

Suddenly  Frodo  saw  before  him  a  black  chasm.  At  the  end 
of  the  hall  the  floor  vanished  and  fell  to  an  unknown  depth. 
The  outer  door  could  only  be  reached  by  a  slender  bridge  of 
stone,  without  kerb  or  rail,  that  spanned  the  chasm  with  one 
curving  spring  of  fifty  feet.  It  was  an  ancient  defence  of  the 
Dwarves  against  any  enemy  that  might  capture  the  First  Hall 
and  the  outer  passages.  They  could  only  pass  across  it  in 
single  file.  At  the  brink  Gandalf  halted  and  the  others  came 
up  in  a  pack  behind. 


THE  BRIDGE  OF  KHAZAD-DUM  429 

‘Lead  the  way,  Gimli!’  he  said.  ‘Pippin  and  Merry  next. 
Straight  on,  and  up  the  stair  beyond  the  door!’ 

Arrows  fell  among  them.  One  struck  Frodo  and  sprang 
back.  Another  pierced  Gandalf’s  hat  and  stuck  there  like  a 
black  feather.  Frodo  looked  behind.  Beyond  the  fire  he  saw 
swarming  black  figures:  there  seemed  to  be  hundreds  of  ores. 
They  brandished  spears  and  scimitars  which  shone  red  as 
blood  in  the  firelight.  Doom ,  doom  rolled  the  drum-beats, 
growing  louder  and  louder,  doom ,  doom. 

Legolas  turned  and  set  an  arrow  to  the  string,  though  it 
was  a  long  shot  for  his  small  bow.  He  drew,  but  his  hand  fell, 
and  the  arrow  slipped  to  the  ground.  He  gave  a  cry  of  dismay 
and  fear.  Two  great  trolls  appeared;  they  bore  great  slabs  of 
stone,  and  flung  them  down  to  serve  as  gangways  over  the 
fire.  But  it  was  not  the  trolls  that  had  filled  the  Elf  with  terror. 
The  ranks  of  the  ores  had  opened,  and  they  crowded  away, 
as  if  they  themselves  were  afraid.  Something  was  coming  up 
behind  them.  What  it  was  could  not  be  seen:  it  was  like  a 
great  shadow,  in  the  middle  of  which  was  a  dark  form,  of 
man-shape  maybe,  yet  greater;  and  a  power  and  terror 
seemed  to  be  in  it  and  to  go  before  it. 

It  came  to  the  edge  of  the  fire  and  the  light  faded  as  if  a 
cloud  had  bent  over  it.  Then  with  a  rush  it  leaped  across  the 
fissure.  The  flames  roared  up  to  greet  it,  and  wreathed  about 
it;  and  a  black  smoke  swirled  in  the  air.  Its  streaming  mane 
kindled,  and  blazed  behind  it.  In  its  right  hand  was  a  blade 
like  a  stabbing  tongue  of  fire;  in  its  left  it  held  a  whip  of  many 
thongs. 

‘ Ai!  ai!’  wailed  Legolas.  ‘A  Balrog!  A  Balrog  is  come!’ 

Gimli  stared  with  wide  eyes.  ‘Durin’s  Bane!’  he  cried,  and 
letting  his  axe  fall  he  covered  his  face. 

‘A  Balrog,’  muttered  Gandalf.  ‘Now  I  understand.’  He 
faltered  and  leaned  heavily  on  his  staff.  ‘What  an  evil  fortune! 
And  I  am  already  weary.’ 

The  dark  figure  streaming  with  fire  raced  towards  them. 
The  ores  yelled  and  poured  over  the  stone  gangways.  Then 


430 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Boromir  raised  his  horn  and  blew.  Loud  the  challenge  rang 
and  bellowed,  like  the  shout  of  many  throats  under  the 
cavernous  roof.  For  a  moment  the  ores  quailed  and  the  fiery 
shadow  halted.  Then  the  echoes  died  as  suddenly  as  a  flame 
blown  out  by  a  dark  wind,  and  the  enemy  advanced  again. 

‘Over  the  bridge!’  cried  Gandalf,  recalling  his  strength. 
‘Fly!  This  is  a  foe  beyond  any  of  you.  I  must  hold  the  narrow 
way.  Fly!’  Aragorn  and  Boromir  did  not  heed  the  command, 
but  still  held  their  ground,  side  by  side,  behind  Gandalf  at 
the  far  end  of  the  bridge.  The  others  halted  just  within  the 
doorway  at  the  hall’s  end,  and  turned,  unable  to  leave  their 
leader  to  face  the  enemy  alone. 

The  Balrog  reached  the  bridge.  Gandalf  stood  in  the 
middle  of  the  span,  leaning  on  the  staff  in  his  left  hand,  but 
in  his  other  hand  Glamdring  gleamed,  cold  and  white.  Flis 
enemy  halted  again,  facing  him,  and  the  shadow  about  it 
reached  out  like  two  vast  wings.  It  raised  the  whip,  and  the 
thongs  whined  and  cracked.  Fire  came  from  its  nostrils.  But 
Gandalf  stood  firm. 

‘You  cannot  pass,’  he  said.  The  ores  stood  still,  and  a  dead 
silence  fell.  ‘I  am  a  servant  of  the  Secret  Fire,  wielder  of  the 
flame  of  Anor.  You  cannot  pass.  The  dark  fire  will  not  avail 
you,  flame  of  Udun.  Go  back  to  the  Shadow!  You  cannot 
pass.’ 

The  Balrog  made  no  answer.  The  fire  in  it  seemed  to  die, 
but  the  darkness  grew.  It  stepped  forward  slowly  on  to  the 
bridge,  and  suddenly  it  drew  itself  up  to  a  great  height,  and 
its  wings  were  spread  from  wall  to  wall;  but  still  Gandalf 
could  be  seen,  glimmering  in  the  gloom;  he  seemed  small, 
and  altogether  alone:  grey  and  bent,  like  a  wizened  tree  before 
the  onset  of  a  storm. 

From  out  of  the  shadow  a  red  sword  leaped  flaming. 

Glamdring  glittered  white  in  answer. 

There  was  a  ringing  clash  and  a  stab  of  white  fire.  The 
Balrog  fell  back,  and  its  sword  flew  up  in  molten  fragments. 
The  wizard  swayed  on  the  bridge,  stepped  back  a  pace,  and 
then  again  stood  still. 


THE  BRIDGE  OF  ICHAZAD-DUM 


431 


‘You  cannot  pass!’  he  said. 

With  a  bound  the  Balrog  leaped  full  upon  the  bridge.  Its 
whip  whirled  and  hissed. 

‘He  cannot  stand  alone!’  cried  Aragorn  suddenly  and  ran 
back  along  the  bridge.  ‘ Elendil /’  he  shouted.  ‘I  am  with  you, 
Gandalf !’ 

‘Gondor!’  cried  Boromir  and  leaped  after  him. 

At  that  moment  Gandalf  lifted  his  staff,  and  crying  aloud 
he  smote  the  bridge  before  him.  The  staff  broke  asunder  and 
fell  from  his  hand.  A  blinding  sheet  of  white  flame  sprang 
up.  The  bridge  cracked.  Right  at  the  Balrog’s  feet  it  broke, 
and  the  stone  upon  which  it  stood  crashed  into  the  gulf,  while 
the  rest  remained,  poised,  quivering  like  a  tongue  of  rock 
thrust  out  into  emptiness. 

With  a  terrible  cry  the  Balrog  fell  forward,  and  its  shadow 
plunged  down  and  vanished.  But  even  as  it  fell  it  swung  its 
whip,  and  the  thongs  lashed  and  curled  about  the  wizard’s 
knees,  dragging  him  to  the  brink.  He  staggered  and  fell, 
grasped  vainly  at  the  stone,  and  slid  into  the  abyss.  ‘Fly,  you 
fools!’  he  cried,  and  was  gone. 

The  fires  went  out,  and  blank  darkness  fell.  The  Company 
stood  rooted  with  horror  staring  into  the  pit.  Even  as  Aragorn 
and  Boromir  came  flying  back,  the  rest  of  the  bridge  cracked 
and  fell.  With  a  cry  Aragorn  roused  them. 

‘Come!  I  will  lead  you  now!’  he  called.  We  must  obey  his 
last  command.  Follow  me!’ 

They  stumbled  wildly  up  the  great  stairs  beyond  the  door, 
Aragorn  leading,  Boromir  at  the  rear.  At  the  top  was  a  wide 
echoing  passage.  Along  this  they  fled.  Frodo  heard  Sam  at 
his  side  weeping,  and  then  he  found  that  he  himself  was 
weeping  as  he  ran.  Doom,  doom,  doom  the  drum-beats  rolled 
behind,  mournful  now  and  slow;  doom! 

They  ran  on.  The  light  grew  before  them;  great  shafts 
pierced  the  roof.  They  ran  swifter.  They  passed  into  a  hall, 
bright  with  daylight  from  its  high  windows  in  the  east.  They 
fled  across  it.  Through  its  huge  broken  doors  they  passed, 


432  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

and  suddenly  before  them  the  Great  Gates  opened,  an  arch 
of  blazing  light. 

There  was  a  guard  of  ores  crouching  in  the  shadows  behind 
the  great  door-posts  towering  on  either  side,  but  the  gates 
were  shattered  and  cast  down.  Aragorn  smote  to  the  ground 
the  captain  that  stood  in  his  path,  and  the  rest  fled  in  terror 
of  his  wrath.  The  Company  swept  past  them  and  took  no 
heed  of  them.  Out  of  the  Gates  they  ran  and  sprang  down 
the  huge  and  age -worn  steps,  the  threshold  of  Moria. 

Thus,  at  last,  they  came  beyond  hope  under  the  sky  and 
felt  the  wind  on  their  faces. 

They  did  not  halt  until  they  were  out  of  bowshot  from  the 
walls.  Dimrill  Dale  lay  about  them.  The  shadow  of  the  Misty 
Mountains  lay  upon  it,  but  eastwards  there  was  a  golden  light 
on  the  land.  It  was  but  one  hour  after  noon.  The  sun  was 
shining;  the  clouds  were  white  and  high. 

They  looked  back.  Dark  yawned  the  archway  of  the  Gates 
under  the  mountain-shadow.  Faint  and  far  beneath  the  earth 
rolled  the  slow  drum-beats:  doom.  A  thin  black  smoke  trailed 
out.  Nothing  else  was  to  be  seen;  the  dale  all  around  was 
empty.  Doom.  Grief  at  last  wholly  overcame  them,  and  they 
wept  long:  some  standing  and  silent,  some  cast  upon  the 
ground.  Doom,  doom.  The  drum-beats  faded. 


Chapter  6 


LOTHLORIEN 


‘Alas!  I  fear  we  cannot  stay  here  longer,’  said  Aragorn.  He 
looked  towards  the  mountains  and  held  up  his  sword.  ‘Fare¬ 
well,  Gandalf !’  he  cried.  ‘Did  I  not  say  to  you:  if  you  pass  the 
doors  of  Moria,  beware ?  Alas  that  I  spoke  true!  What  hope 
have  we  without  you?’ 

He  turned  to  the  Company.  ‘We  must  do  without  hope,’ 
he  said.  ‘At  least  we  may  yet  be  avenged.  Let  us  gird  ourselves 
and  weep  no  more!  Come!  We  have  a  long  road,  and  much 
to  do.’ 

They  rose  and  looked  about  them.  Northward  the  dale  ran 
up  into  a  glen  of  shadows  between  two  great  arms  of  the 
mountains,  above  which  three  white  peaks  were  shining: 
Celebdil,  Fanuidhol,  Caradhras,  the  Mountains  of  Moria.  At 
the  head  of  the  glen  a  torrent  flowed  like  a  white  lace  over 
an  endless  ladder  of  short  falls,  and  a  mist  of  foam  hung  in 
the  air  about  the  mountains’  feet. 

‘Yonder  is  the  Dimrill  Stair,’  said  Aragorn,  pointing  to  the 
falls.  ‘Down  the  deep-cloven  way  that  climbs  beside  the 
torrent  we  should  have  come,  if  fortune  had  been  kinder.’ 

‘Or  Caradhras  less  cruel,’  said  Gimli.  ‘There  he  stands 
smiling  in  the  sun!’  He  shook  his  fist  at  the  furthest  of  the 
snow-capped  peaks  and  turned  away. 

To  the  east  the  outflung  arm  of  the  mountains  marched  to 
a  sudden  end,  and  far  lands  could  be  descried  beyond  them, 
wide  and  vague.  To  the  south  the  Misty  Mountains  receded 
endlessly  as  far  as  sight  could  reach.  Less  than  a  mile  away, 
and  a  little  below  them,  for  they  still  stood  high  up  on  the 
west  side  of  the  dale,  there  lay  a  mere.  It  was  long  and  oval, 
shaped  like  a  great  spear-head  thrust  deep  into  the  northern 
glen;  but  its  southern  end  was  beyond  the  shadows  under  the 


434 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


sunlit  sky.  Yet  its  waters  were  dark:  a  deep  blue  like  clear 
evening  sky  seen  from  a  lamp-lit  room.  Its  face  was  still  and 
unruffled.  About  it  lay  a  smooth  sward,  shelving  down  on  all 
sides  to  its  bare  unbroken  rim. 

‘There  lies  the  Mirrormere,  deep  Kheled-zaram!’  said 
Gimli  sadly.  ‘I  remember  that  he  said:  “May  you  have  joy  of 
the  sight!  But  we  cannot  linger  there.”  Now  long  shall  I 
journey  ere  I  have  joy  again.  It  is  I  that  must  hasten  away, 
and  he  that  must  remain.’ 

The  Company  now  went  down  the  road  from  the  Gates. 
It  was  rough  and  broken,  fading  to  a  winding  track  between 
heather  and  whin  that  thrust  amid  the  cracking  stones.  But 
still  it  could  be  seen  that  once  long  ago  a  great  paved  way  had 
wound  upwards  from  the  lowlands  to  the  Dwarf-kingdom.  In 
places  there  were  ruined  works  of  stone  beside  the  path,  and 
mounds  of  green  topped  with  slender  birches,  or  fir-trees 
sighing  in  the  wind.  An  eastward  bend  led  them  hard  by  the 
sward  of  Mirrormere,  and  there  not  far  from  the  roadside 
stood  a  single  column  broken  at  the  top. 

‘That  is  Durin’s  Stone!’  cried  Gimli.  ‘I  cannot  pass  without 
turning  aside  for  a  moment  to  look  at  the  wonder  of  the  dale!’ 

‘Be  swift  then!’  said  Aragorn,  looking  back  towards  the 
Gates.  ‘The  Sun  sinks  early.  The  Ores  will  not,  maybe,  come 
out  till  after  dusk,  but  we  must  be  far  away  before  nightfall. 
The  Moon  is  almost  spent,  and  it  will  be  dark  tonight.’ 

‘Come  with  me,  Frodo!’  cried  the  dwarf,  springing  from 
the  road.  ‘I  would  not  have  you  go  without  seeing  Kheled- 
zaram.’  He  ran  down  the  long  green  slope.  Frodo  followed 
slowly,  drawn  by  the  still  blue  water  in  spite  of  hurt  and 
weariness;  Sam  came  up  behind. 

Beside  the  standing  stone  Gimli  halted  and  looked  up.  It 
was  cracked  and  weather-worn,  and  the  faint  runes  upon  its 
side  could  not  be  read.  ‘This  pillar  marks  the  spot  where 
Durin  first  looked  in  the  Mirrormere,’  said  the  dwarf.  ‘Let  us 
look  ourselves  once,  ere  we  go!’ 

They  stooped  over  the  dark  water.  At  first  they  could  see 


LOTHLORIEN 


435 


nothing.  Then  slowly  they  saw  the  forms  of  the  encircling 
mountains  mirrored  in  a  profound  blue,  and  the  peaks  were 
like  plumes  of  white  flame  above  them;  beyond  there  was  a 
space  of  sky.  There  like  jewels  sunk  in  the  deep  shone  glinting 
stars,  though  sunlight  was  in  the  sky  above.  Of  their  own 
stooping  forms  no  shadow  could  be  seen. 

‘O  Kheled-zaram  fair  and  wonderful!’  said  Gimli.  ‘There 
lies  the  Crown  of  Durin  till  he  wakes.  Farewell!’  He  bowed, 
and  turned  away,  and  hastened  back  up  the  greensward  to 
the  road  again. 

‘What  did  you  see?’  said  Pippin  to  Sam,  but  Sam  was  too 
deep  in  thought  to  answer. 

The  road  now  turned  south  and  went  quickly  downwards, 
running  out  from  between  the  arms  of  the  dale.  Some  way 
below  the  mere  they  came  on  a  deep  well  of  water,  clear  as 
crystal,  from  which  a  freshet  fell  over  a  stone  lip  and  ran 
glistening  and  gurgling  down  a  steep  rocky  channel. 

‘Here  is  the  spring  from  which  the  Silverlode  rises,’  said 
Gimli.  ‘Do  not  drink  of  it!  It  is  icy  cold.’ 

‘Soon  it  becomes  a  swift  river,  and  it  gathers  water  from 
many  other  mountain-streams,’  said  Aragorn.  ‘Our  road 
leads  beside  it  for  many  miles.  For  I  shall  take  you  by  the 
road  that  Gandalf  chose,  and  first  I  hope  to  come  to  the 
woods  where  the  Silverlode  flows  into  the  Great  River  -  out 
yonder.’  They  looked  as  he  pointed,  and  before  them  they 
could  see  the  stream  leaping  down  to  the  trough  of  the  valley, 
and  then  running  on  and  away  into  the  lower  lands,  until  it 
was  lost  in  a  golden  haze. 

‘There  lie  the  woods  of  Lothlorien!’  said  Legolas.  ‘That  is 
the  fairest  of  all  the  dwellings  of  my  people.  There  are  no 
trees  like  the  trees  of  that  land.  For  in  the  autumn  their  leaves 
fall  not,  but  turn  to  gold.  Not  till  the  spring  comes  and  the 
new  green  opens  do  they  fall,  and  then  the  boughs  are  laden 
with  yellow  flowers;  and  the  floor  of  the  wood  is  golden,  and 
golden  is  the  roof,  and  its  pillars  are  of  silver,  for  the  bark  of 
the  trees  is  smooth  and  grey.  So  still  our  songs  in  Mirkwood 


436  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

say.  My  heart  would  be  glad  if  I  were  beneath  the  eaves  of 
that  wood,  and  it  were  springtime!’ 

‘My  heart  will  be  glad,  even  in  the  winter,’  said  Aragorn. 
‘But  it  lies  many  miles  away.  Let  us  hasten!’ 

For  some  time  Frodo  and  Sam  managed  to  keep  up  with 
the  others;  but  Aragorn  was  leading  them  at  a  great  pace, 
and  after  a  while  they  lagged  behind.  They  had  eaten  nothing 
since  the  early  morning.  Sam’s  cut  was  burning  like  fire,  and 
his  head  felt  light.  In  spite  of  the  shining  sun  the  wind  seemed 
chill  after  the  warm  darkness  of  Moria.  He  shivered.  Frodo 
felt  every  step  more  painful  and  he  gasped  for  breath. 

At  last  Legolas  turned,  and  seeing  them  now  far  behind, 
he  spoke  to  Aragorn.  The  others  halted,  and  Aragorn  ran 
back,  calling  to  Boromir  to  come  with  him. 

‘I  am  sorry,  Frodo!’  he  cried,  full  of  concern.  ‘So  much  has 
happened  this  day  and  we  have  such  need  of  haste,  that  I 
have  forgotten  that  you  were  hurt;  and  Sam  too.  You  should 
have  spoken.  We  have  done  nothing  to  ease  you,  as  we  ought, 
though  all  the  ores  of  Moria  were  after  us.  Come  now!  A 
little  further  on  there  is  a  place  where  we  can  rest  for  a  little. 
There  I  will  do  what  I  can  for  you.  Come,  Boromir!  We  will 
carry  them.’ 

Soon  afterwards  they  came  upon  another  stream  that  ran 
down  from  the  west,  and  joined  its  bubbling  water  with 
the  hurrying  Silverlode.  Together  they  plunged  over  a  fall 
of  green-hued  stone,  and  foamed  down  into  a  dell.  About 
it  stood  fir-trees,  short  and  bent,  and  its  sides  were  steep 
and  clothed  with  harts-tongue  and  shrubs  of  whortle-berry. 
At  the  bottom  there  was  a  level  space  through  which  the 
stream  flowed  noisily  over  shining  pebbles.  Here  they  rested. 
It  was  now  nearly  three  hours  after  noon,  and  they  had  come 
only  a  few  miles  from  the  Gates.  Already  the  sun  was 
westering. 

While  Gimli  and  the  two  younger  hobbits  kindled  a  fire  of 
brush-  and  fir-wood,  and  drew  water,  Aragorn  tended  Sam 
and  Frodo.  Sam’s  wound  was  not  deep,  but  it  looked  ugly, 


LOTHLORIEN  437 

and  Aragorn’s  face  was  grave  as  he  examined  it.  After  a 
moment  he  looked  up  with  relief. 

‘Good  luck,  Sam!’  he  said.  ‘Many  have  received  worse  than 
this  in  payment  for  the  slaying  of  their  first  ore.  The  cut  is 
not  poisoned,  as  the  wounds  of  ore-blades  too  often  are.  It 
should  heal  well  when  I  have  tended  it.  Bathe  it  when  Gimli 
has  heated  water.’ 

He  opened  his  pouch  and  drew  out  some  withered  leaves. 
‘They  are  dry,  and  some  of  their  virtue  has  gone,’  he  said, 
‘but  here  I  have  still  some  of  the  leaves  of  athelas  that  I 
gathered  near  Weathertop.  Crush  one  in  the  water,  and  wash 
the  wound  clean,  and  I  will  bind  it.  Now  it  is  your  turn, 
Frodo!’ 

‘I  am  all  right,’  said  Frodo,  reluctant  to  have  his  garments 
touched.  ‘All  I  needed  was  some  food  and  a  little  rest.’ 

‘No!’  said  Aragorn.  ‘We  must  have  a  look  and  see  what 
the  hammer  and  the  anvil  have  done  to  you.  I  still  marvel 
that  you  are  alive  at  all.’  Gently  he  stripped  off  Frodo’s 
old  jacket  and  worn  tunic,  and  gave  a  gasp  of  wonder. 
Then  he  laughed.  The  silver  corslet  shimmered  before  his 
eyes  like  the  light  upon  a  rippling  sea.  Carefully  he  took  it 
off  and  held  it  up,  and  the  gems  on  it  glittered  like  stars,  and 
the  sound  of  the  shaken  rings  was  like  the  tinkle  of  rain  in  a 
pool. 

‘Look,  my  friends!’  he  called.  ‘Here’s  a  pretty  hobbit-skin 
to  wrap  an  elven-princeling  in!  If  it  were  known  that  hobbits 
had  such  hides,  all  the  hunters  of  Middle-earth  would  be 
riding  to  the  Shire.’ 

‘And  all  the  arrows  of  all  the  hunters  in  the  world  would 
be  in  vain,’  said  Gimli,  gazing  at  the  mail  in  wonder.  ‘It  is  a 
mithril-coat.  Mithril!  I  have  never  seen  or  heard  tell  of  one 
so  fair.  Is  this  the  coat  that  Gandalf  spoke  of?  Then  he 
undervalued  it.  But  it  was  well  given!’ 

‘I  have  often  wondered  what  you  and  Bilbo  were  doing,  so 
close  in  his  little  room,’  said  Merry.  ‘Bless  the  old  hobbit!  I 
love  him  more  than  ever.  I  hope  we  get  a  chance  of  telling 
him  about  it!  ’ 


438 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


There  was  a  dark  and  blackened  bruise  on  Frodo’s  right 
side  and  breast.  Under  the  mail  there  was  a  shirt  of  soft 
leather,  but  at  one  point  the  rings  had  been  driven  through  it 
into  the  flesh.  Frodo’s  left  side  also  was  scored  and  bruised 
where  he  had  been  hurled  against  the  wall.  While  the  others 
set  the  food  ready,  Aragorn  bathed  the  hurts  with  water  in 
which  athelas  was  steeped.  The  pungent  fragrance  filled  the 
dell,  and  all  those  who  stooped  over  the  steaming  water  felt 
refreshed  and  strengthened.  Soon  Frodo  felt  the  pain  leave 
him,  and  his  breath  grew  easy:  though  he  was  stiff  and  sore 
to  the  touch  for  many  days.  Aragorn  bound  some  soft  pads 
of  cloth  at  his  side. 

‘The  mail  is  marvellously  light,’  he  said.  ‘Put  it  on  again, 
if  you  can  bear  it.  My  heart  is  glad  to  know  that  you  have 
such  a  coat.  Do  not  lay  it  aside,  even  in  sleep,  unless  fortune 
brings  you  where  you  are  safe  for  a  while;  and  that  will  seldom 
chance  while  your  quest  lasts.’ 

When  they  had  eaten,  the  Company  got  ready  to  go  on. 
They  put  out  the  fire  and  hid  all  traces  of  it.  Then  climbing 
out  of  the  dell  they  took  to  the  road  again.  They  had  not  gone 
far  before  the  sun  sank  behind  the  westward  heights  and  great 
shadows  crept  down  the  mountain-sides.  Dusk  veiled  their 
feet,  and  mist  rose  in  the  hollows.  Away  in  the  east  the 
evening  light  lay  pale  upon  the  dim  lands  of  distant  plain 
and  wood.  Sam  and  Frodo  now  feeling  eased  and  greatly 
refreshed  were  able  to  go  at  a  fair  pace,  and  with  only  one 
brief  halt  Aragorn  led  the  Company  on  for  nearly  three  more 
hours. 

It  was  dark.  Deep  night  had  fallen.  There  were  many  clear 
stars,  but  the  fast-waning  moon  would  not  be  seen  till  late. 
Gimli  and  Frodo  were  at  the  rear,  walking  softly  and  not 
speaking,  listening  for  any  sound  upon  the  road  behind.  At 
length  Gimli  broke  the  silence. 

‘Not  a  sound  but  the  wind,’  he  said.  ‘There  are  no  goblins 
near,  or  my  ears  are  made  of  wood.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the 
Ores  will  be  content  with  driving  us  from  Moria.  And  maybe 


LOTHLORIEN 


439 


that  was  all  their  purpose,  and  they  had  nothing  else  to  do 
with  us  -  with  the  Ring.  Though  Ores  will  often  pursue  foes 
for  many  leagues  into  the  plain,  if  they  have  a  fallen  captain 
to  avenge.’ 

Frodo  did  not  answer.  He  looked  at  Sting,  and  the  blade 
was  dull.  Yet  he  had  heard  something,  or  thought  he  had.  As 
soon  as  the  shadows  had  fallen  about  them  and  the  road 
behind  was  dim,  he  had  heard  again  the  quick  patter  of  feet. 
Even  now  he  heard  it.  He  turned  swiftly.  There  were  two 
tiny  gleams  of  light  behind,  or  for  a  moment  he  thought  he 
saw  them,  but  at  once  they  slipped  aside  and  vanished. 

‘What  is  it?’  said  the  dwarf. 

‘I  don’t  know,’  answered  Frodo.  ‘I  thought  I  heard  feet, 
and  I  thought  I  saw  a  light  -  like  eyes.  I  have  thought  so 
often,  since  we  first  entered  Moria.’ 

Gimli  halted  and  stooped  to  the  ground.  ‘I  hear  nothing 
but  the  night-speech  of  plant  and  stone,’  he  said.  ‘Come!  Let 
us  hurry!  The  others  are  out  of  sight.’ 

The  night- wind  blew  chill  up  the  valley  to  meet  them. 
Before  them  a  wide  grey  shadow  loomed,  and  they  heard  an 
endless  rustle  of  leaves  like  poplars  in  the  breeze. 

‘Lothlorien!’  cried  Legolas.  ‘Lothlorien!  We  have  come  to 
the  eaves  of  the  Golden  Wood.  Alas  that  it  is  winter!’ 

Under  the  night  the  trees  stood  tall  before  them,  arched 
over  the  road  and  stream  that  ran  suddenly  beneath  their 
spreading  boughs.  In  the  dim  light  of  the  stars  their  stems 
were  grey,  and  their  quivering  leaves  a  hint  of  fallow  gold. 

‘Lothlorien!’  said  Aragorn.  ‘Glad  I  am  to  hear  again  the 
wind  in  the  trees!  We  are  still  little  more  than  five  leagues 
from  the  Gates,  but  we  can  go  no  further.  Here  let  us  hope 
that  the  virtue  of  the  Elves  will  keep  us  tonight  from  the  peril 
that  comes  behind.’ 

‘If  Elves  indeed  still  dwell  here  in  the  darkening  world,’ 
said  Gimli. 

‘It  is  long  since  any  of  my  own  folic  journeyed  hither 
back  to  the  land  whence  we  wandered  in  ages  long  ago,’ 


440 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


said  Legolas,  ‘but  we  hear  that  Lorien  is  not  yet  deserted, 
for  there  is  a  secret  power  here  that  holds  evil  from  the 
land.  Nevertheless  its  folk  are  seldom  seen,  and  maybe  they 
dwell  now  deep  in  the  woods  and  far  from  the  northern 
border.’ 

‘Indeed  deep  in  the  wood  they  dwell,’  said  Aragorn,  and 
sighed  as  if  some  memory  stirred  in  him.  ‘We  must  fend  for 
ourselves  tonight.  We  will  go  forward  a  short  way,  until  the 
trees  are  all  about  us,  and  then  we  will  turn  aside  from  the 
path  and  seek  a  place  to  rest  in.’ 

He  stepped  forward;  but  Boromir  stood  irresolute  and  did 
not  follow.  ‘Is  there  no  other  way?’  he  said. 

‘What  other  fairer  way  would  you  desire?’  said  Aragorn. 

‘A  plain  road,  though  it  led  through  a  hedge  of  swords,’ 
said  Boromir.  ‘By  strange  paths  has  this  Company  been  led, 
and  so  far  to  evil  fortune.  Against  my  will  we  passed  under 
the  shades  of  Moria,  to  our  loss.  And  now  we  must  enter  the 
Golden  Wood,  you  say.  But  of  that  perilous  land  we  have 
heard  in  Gondor,  and  it  is  said  that  few  come  out  who  once 
go  in;  and  of  that  few  none  have  escaped  unscathed.’ 

‘Say  not  unscathed ,  but  if  you  say  unchanged ,  then  maybe 
you  will  speak  the  truth,’  said  Aragorn.  ‘But  lore  wanes  in 
Gondor,  Boromir,  if  in  the  city  of  those  who  once  were  wise 
they  now  speak  evil  of  Lothlorien.  Believe  what  you  will, 
there  is  no  other  way  for  us  -  unless  you  would  go  back  to 
Moria-gate,  or  scale  the  pathless  mountains,  or  swim  the 
Great  River  all  alone.’ 

‘Then  lead  on!’  said  Boromir.  ‘But  it  is  perilous.’ 

‘Perilous  indeed,’  said  Aragorn,  ‘fair  and  perilous;  but  only 
evil  need  fear  it,  or  those  who  bring  some  evil  with  them. 
Follow  me!’ 

They  had  gone  little  more  than  a  mile  into  the  forest  when 
they  came  upon  another  stream  flowing  down  swiftly  from 
the  tree-clad  slopes  that  climbed  back  westward  towards  the 
mountains.  They  heard  it  splashing  over  a  fall  away  among 
the  shadows  on  their  right.  Its  dark  hurrying  waters  ran  across 


LOTHLORIEN  44 1 

the  path  before  them,  and  joined  the  Silverlode  in  a  swirl  of 
dim  pools  among  the  roots  of  trees. 

‘Here  is  Nimrodel!’  said  Legolas.  ‘Of  this  stream  the  Silvan 
Elves  made  many  songs  long  ago,  and  still  we  sing  them  in 
the  North,  remembering  the  rainbow  on  its  falls,  and  the 
golden  flowers  that  floated  in  its  foam.  All  is  dark  now  and 
the  Bridge  of  Nimrodel  is  broken  down.  I  will  bathe  my  feet, 
for  it  is  said  that  the  water  is  healing  to  the  weary.’  He  went 
forward  and  climbed  down  the  deep-cloven  bank  and  stepped 
into  the  stream. 

‘Follow  me!’  he  cried.  ‘The  water  is  not  deep.  Let  us  wade 
across!  On  the  further  bank  we  can  rest,  and  the  sound  of 
the  falling  water  may  bring  us  sleep  and  forgetfulness  of 
grief.’ 

One  by  one  they  climbed  down  and  followed  Legolas.  For 
a  moment  Frodo  stood  near  the  brink  and  let  the  water  flow 
over  his  tired  feet.  It  was  cold  but  its  touch  was  clean,  and  as 
he  went  on  and  it  mounted  to  his  knees,  he  felt  that  the  stain 
of  travel  and  all  weariness  was  washed  from  his  limbs. 

When  all  the  Company  had  crossed,  they  sat  and  rested 
and  ate  a  little  food;  and  Legolas  told  them  tales  of  Lothlorien 
that  the  Elves  of  Mirkwood  still  kept  in  their  hearts,  of  sun¬ 
light  and  starlight  upon  the  meadows  by  the  Great  River 
before  the  world  was  grey. 

At  length  a  silence  fell,  and  they  heard  the  music  of  the 
waterfall  running  sweetly  in  the  shadows.  Almost  Frodo 
fancied  that  he  could  hear  a  voice  singing,  mingled  with 
the  sound  of  the  water. 

‘Do  you  hear  the  voice  of  Nimrodel?’  asked  Legolas.  ‘I  will 
sing  you  a  song  of  the  maiden  Nimrodel,  who  bore  the  same 
name  as  the  stream  beside  which  she  lived  long  ago.  It  is  a 
fair  song  in  our  woodland  tongue;  but  this  is  how  it  runs  in 
the  Westron  Speech,  as  some  in  Rivendell  now  sing  it.’  In  a 
soft  voice  hardly  to  be  heard  amid  the  rustle  of  the  leaves 
above  them  he  began: 


442 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


An  Elven-maid  there  was  of  old, 

A  shining  star  by  day: 

Her  mantle  white  was  hemmed  with  gold, 
Her  shoes  of  silver-grey. 

A  star  was  bound  upon  her  brows, 

A  light  was  on  her  hair 

As  sun  upon  the  golden  boughs 
In  Lorien  the  fair. 

Her  hair  was  long,  her  limbs  were  white, 
And  fair  she  was  and  free; 

And  in  the  wind  she  went  as  light 
As  leaf  of  linden-tree. 

Beside  the  falls  of  Nimrodel, 

By  water  clear  and  cool, 

Her  voice  as  falling  silver  fell 
Into  the  shining  pool. 

Where  now  she  wanders  none  can  tell, 

In  sunlight  or  in  shade; 

For  lost  of  yore  was  Nimrodel 
And  in  the  mountains  strayed. 

The  elven-ship  in  haven  grey 
Beneath  the  mountain-lee 

Awaited  her  for  many  a  day 
Beside  the  roaring  sea. 

A  wind  by  night  in  Northern  lands 
Arose,  and  loud  it  cried, 

And  drove  the  ship  from  elven-strands 
Across  the  streaming  tide. 


LOTHLORIEN 


443 


When  dawn  came  dim  the  land  was  lost, 

The  mountains  sinking  grey 

Beyond  the  heaving  waves  that  tossed 
Their  plumes  of  blinding  spray. 

Amroth  beheld  the  fading  shore 
Now  low  beyond  the  swell, 

And  cursed  the  faithless  ship  that  bore 
Him  far  from  Nimrodel. 

Of  old  he  was  an  Elven-king, 

A  lord  of  tree  and  glen, 

When  golden  were  the  boughs  in  spring 
In  fair  Lothlorien. 

From  helm  to  sea  they  saw  him  leap, 

As  arrow  from  the  string, 

And  dive  into  the  water  deep, 

As  mew  upon  the  wing. 

The  wind  was  in  his  flowing  hair, 

The  foam  about  him  shone; 

Afar  they  saw  him  strong  and  fair 
Go  riding  like  a  swan. 

But  from  the  West  has  come  no  word, 

And  on  the  Hither  Shore 

No  tidings  Elven-folk  have  heard 
Of  Amroth  evermore. 

The  voice  of  Legolas  faltered,  and  the  song  ceased.  ‘I  can¬ 
not  sing  any  more,’  he  said.  ‘That  is  but  a  part,  for  I  have 
forgotten  much.  It  is  long  and  sad,  for  it  tells  how  sorrow 
came  upon  Lothlorien,  Lorien  of  the  Blossom,  when  the 
Dwarves  awakened  evil  in  the  mountains.’ 

‘But  the  Dwarves  did  not  make  the  evil,’  said  Gimli. 

‘I  said  not  so;  yet  evil  came,’  answered  Legolas  sadly.  ‘Then 


444 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


many  of  the  Elves  of  Nimrodel’s  kindred  left  their  dwellings 
and  departed,  and  she  was  lost  far  in  the  South,  in  the  passes 
of  the  White  Mountains;  and  she  came  not  to  the  ship  where 
Amroth  her  lover  waited  for  her.  But  in  the  spring  when  the 
wind  is  in  the  new  leaves  the  echo  of  her  voice  may  still  be 
heard  by  the  falls  that  bear  her  name.  And  when  the  wind  is 
in  the  South  the  voice  of  Amroth  comes  up  from  the  sea;  for 
Nimrodel  flows  into  Silverlode,  that  Elves  call  Celebrant,  and 
Celebrant  into  Anduin  the  Great,  and  Anduin  flows  into  the 
Bay  of  Belfalas  whence  the  Elves  of  Lorien  set  sail.  But 
neither  Nimrodel  nor  Amroth  came  ever  back. 

‘It  is  told  that  she  had  a  house  built  in  the  branches  of  a 
tree  that  grew  near  the  falls;  for  that  was  the  custom  of  the 
Elves  of  Lorien,  to  dwell  in  the  trees,  and  maybe  it  is  so  still. 
Therefore  they  were  called  the  Galadhrim,  the  Tree-people. 
Deep  in  their  forest  the  trees  are  very  great.  The  people  of 
the  woods  did  not  delve  in  the  ground  like  Dwarves,  nor 
build  strong  places  of  stone  before  the  Shadow  came.’ 

‘And  even  in  these  latter  days  dwelling  in  the  trees  might 
be  thought  safer  than  sitting  on  the  ground,’  said  Gimli.  He 
looked  across  the  stream  to  the  road  that  led  back  to  Dimrill 
Dale,  and  then  up  into  the  roof  of  dark  boughs  above. 

‘Your  words  bring  good  counsel,  Gimli,’  said  Aragorn. 
‘We  cannot  build  a  house,  but  tonight  we  will  do  as  the 
Galadhrim  and  seek  refuge  in  the  tree-tops,  if  we  can.  We 
have  sat  here  beside  the  road  already  longer  than  was  wise.’ 

The  Company  now  turned  aside  from  the  path,  and  went 
into  the  shadow  of  the  deeper  woods,  westward  along  the 
mountain-stream  away  from  Silverlode.  Not  far  from  the  falls 
of  Nimrodel  they  found  a  cluster  of  trees,  some  of  which 
overhung  the  stream.  Their  great  grey  trunks  were  of  mighty 
girth,  but  their  height  could  not  be  guessed. 

‘I  will  climb  up,’  said  Legolas.  ‘I  am  at  home  among  trees, 
by  root  or  bough,  though  these  trees  are  of  a  kind  strange  to 
me,  save  as  a  name  in  song.  Mellyrn  they  are  called,  and  are 
those  that  bear  the  yellow  blossom,  but  I  have  never  climbed 


LOTHLORIEN 


445 


in  one.  I  will  see  now  what  is  their  shape  and  way  of  growth.’ 

‘Whatever  it  may  be,’  said  Pippin,  ‘they  will  be  marvellous 
trees  indeed  if  they  can  offer  any  rest  at  night,  except  to  birds. 
I  cannot  sleep  on  a  perch!’ 

‘Then  dig  a  hole  in  the  ground,’  said  Legolas,  ‘if  that  is  more 
after  the  fashion  of  your  kind.  But  you  must  dig  swift  and  deep, 
if  you  wish  to  hide  from  Ores.’  He  sprang  lightly  up  from  the 
ground  and  caught  a  branch  that  grew  from  the  trunk  high 
above  his  head.  But  even  as  he  swung  there  for  a  moment,  a 
voice  spoke  suddenly  from  the  tree-shadows  above  him. 

‘ Daro!’  it  said  in  commanding  tone,  and  Legolas  dropped 
back  to  earth  in  surprise  and  fear.  He  shrank  against  the  bole 
of  the  tree. 

‘Stand  still!’  he  whispered  to  the  others.  ‘Do  not  move  or 
speak!’ 

There  was  a  sound  of  soft  laughter  over  their  heads,  and 
then  another  clear  voice  spoke  in  an  elven-tongue.  Frodo 
could  understand  little  of  what  was  said,  for  the  speech  that 
the  Silvan  folk  east  of  the  mountains  used  among  themselves 
was  unlike  that  of  the  West.  Legolas  looked  up  and  answered 
in  the  same  language.* 

Who  are  they,  and  what  do  they  say?’  asked  Merry. 

‘They’re  Elves,’  said  Sam.  ‘Can’t  you  hear  their  voices?’ 

‘Yes,  they  are  Elves,’  said  Legolas;  ‘and  they  say  that  you 
breathe  so  loud  that  they  could  shoot  you  in  the  dark.’  Sam 
hastily  put  his  hand  over  his  mouth.  ‘But  they  say  also  that 
you  need  have  no  fear.  They  have  been  aware  of  us  for  a 
long  while.  They  heard  my  voice  across  the  Nimrodel,  and 
knew  that  I  was  one  of  their  Northern  kindred,  and  therefore 
they  did  not  hinder  our  crossing;  and  afterwards  they  heard 
my  song.  Now  they  bid  me  climb  up  with  Frodo;  for  they 
seem  to  have  had  some  tidings  of  him  and  of  our  journey. 
The  others  they  ask  to  wait  a  little,  and  to  keep  watch  at  the 
foot  of  the  tree,  until  they  have  decided  what  is  to  be  done.’ 

*  *  * 


*  See  note  in  Appendix  F:  Of  the  Elves. 


446  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

Out  of  the  shadows  a  ladder  was  let  down:  it  was  made  of 
rope,  silver-grey  and  glimmering  in  the  dark,  and  though  it 
looked  slender  it  proved  strong  enough  to  bear  many  men. 
Legolas  ran  lightly  up,  and  Frodo  followed  slowly;  behind 
came  Sam  trying  not  to  breathe  loudly.  The  branches  of  the 
mallorn-tree  grew  out  nearly  straight  from  the  trunk,  and 
then  swept  upward;  but  near  the  top  the  main  stem  divided 
into  a  crown  of  many  boughs,  and  among  these  they  found 
that  there  had  been  built  a  wooden  platform,  or  jiet  as  such 
things  were  called  in  those  days:  the  Elves  called  it  a  talan.  It 
was  reached  by  a  round  hole  in  the  centre  through  which  the 
ladder  passed. 

When  Frodo  came  at  last  up  on  to  the  flet  he  found  Legolas 
seated  with  three  other  Elves.  They  were  clad  in  shadowy- 
grey,  and  could  not  be  seen  among  the  tree-stems,  unless 
they  moved  suddenly.  They  stood  up,  and  one  of  them 
uncovered  a  small  lamp  that  gave  out  a  slender  silver  beam. 
He  held  it  up,  looking  at  Frodo’s  face,  and  Sam’s.  Then  he 
shut  off  the  light  again,  and  spoke  words  of  welcome  in  his 
elven-tongue.  Frodo  spoke  haltingly  in  return. 

Welcome!’  the  Elf  then  said  again  in  the  Common  Lan¬ 
guage,  speaking  slowly.  We  seldom  use  any  tongue  but  our 
own;  for  we  dwell  now  in  the  heart  of  the  forest,  and  do  not 
willingly  have  dealings  with  any  other  folk.  Even  our  own 
kindred  in  the  North  are  sundered  from  us.  But  there  are 
some  of  us  still  who  go  abroad  for  the  gathering  of  news  and 
the  watching  of  our  enemies,  and  they  speak  the  languages 
of  other  lands.  I  am  one.  Haldir  is  my  name.  My  brothers, 
Rumil  and  Orophin,  speak  little  of  your  tongue. 

‘But  we  have  heard  rumours  of  your  coming,  for  the  mess¬ 
engers  of  Elrond  passed  by  Lorien  on  their  way  home  up  the 
Dimrill  Stair.  We  had  not  heard  of  -  hobbits,  of  halflings,  for 
many  a  long  year,  and  did  not  know  that  any  yet  dwelt  in 
Middle-earth.  You  do  not  look  evil!  And  since  you  come  with 
an  Elf  of  our  kindred,  we  are  willing  to  befriend  you,  as  Elrond 
asked;  though  it  is  not  our  custom  to  lead  strangers  through 
our  land.  But  you  must  stay  here  tonight.  How  many  are  you?’ 


LOTHLORIEN 


447 


‘Eight,’  said  Legolas.  ‘Myself,  four  hobbits;  and  two  men, 
one  of  whom,  Aragorn,  is  an  Elf-friend  of  the  folk  of 
Westernesse.’ 

‘The  name  of  Aragorn  son  of  Arathorn  is  known  in  Lorien,’ 
said  Haldir,  ‘and  he  has  the  favour  of  the  Lady.  All  then  is 
well.  But  you  have  yet  spoken  only  of  seven.’ 

‘The  eighth  is  a  dwarf,’  said  Legolas. 

‘A  dwarf!’  said  Haldir.  ‘That  is  not  well.  We  have  not  had 
dealings  with  the  Dwarves  since  the  Dark  Days.  They  are 
not  permitted  in  our  land.  I  cannot  allow  him  to  pass.’ 

‘But  he  is  from  the  Lonely  Mountain,  one  of  Dain’s  trusty 
people,  and  friendly  to  Elrond,’  said  Frodo.  ‘Elrond  himself 
chose  him  to  be  one  of  our  companions,  and  he  has  been 
brave  and  faithful.’ 

The  Elves  spoke  together  in  soft  voices,  and  questioned 
Legolas  in  their  own  tongue.  ‘Very  good,’  said  Haldir  at  last. 
‘We  will  do  this,  though  it  is  against  our  liking.  If  Aragorn 
and  Legolas  will  guard  him,  and  answer  for  him,  he  shall 
pass;  but  he  must  go  blindfold  through  Lothlorien. 

‘But  now  we  must  debate  no  longer.  Your  folic  must  not 
remain  on  the  ground.  We  have  been  keeping  watch  on  the 
rivers,  ever  since  we  saw  a  great  troop  of  Ores  going  north 
towards  Moria,  along  the  skirts  of  the  mountains,  many  days 
ago.  Wolves  are  howling  on  the  wood’s  borders.  If  you  have 
indeed  come  from  Moria,  the  peril  cannot  be  far  behind. 
Tomorrow  early  you  must  go  on. 

‘The  four  hobbits  shall  climb  up  here  and  stay  with  us  - 
we  do  not  fear  them!  There  is  another  talan  in  the  next 
tree.  There  the  others  must  take  refuge.  You,  Legolas,  must 
answer  to  us  for  them.  Call  us,  if  anything  is  amiss!  And  have 
an  eye  on  that  dwarf!’ 

Legolas  at  once  went  down  the  ladder  to  take  Haldir’s 
message;  and  soon  afterwards  Merry  and  Pippin  clambered 
up  on  to  the  high  flet.  They  were  out  of  breath  and  seemed 
rather  scared. 

‘There!’  said  Merry  panting.  We  have  lugged  up  your 


448 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


blankets  as  well  as  our  own.  Strider  has  hidden  all  the  rest  of 
our  baggage  in  a  deep  drift  of  leaves.’ 

‘You  had  no  need  of  your  burdens,’  said  Haldir.  ‘It  is  cold 
in  the  tree-tops  in  winter,  though  the  wind  tonight  is  in  the 
South;  but  we  have  food  and  drink  to  give  you  that  will  drive 
away  the  night-chill,  and  we  have  skins  and  cloaks  to  spare.’ 

The  hobbits  accepted  this  second  (and  far  better)  supper 
very  gladly.  Then  they  wrapped  themselves  warmly,  not  only 
in  the  fur-cloaks  of  the  Elves,  but  in  their  own  blankets  as 
well,  and  tried  to  go  to  sleep.  But  weary  as  they  were  only 
Sam  found  that  easy  to  do.  Hobbits  do  not  like  heights,  and 
do  not  sleep  upstairs,  even  when  they  have  any  stairs.  The 
flet  was  not  at  all  to  their  liking  as  a  bedroom.  It  had  no  walls, 
not  even  a  rail;  only  on  one  side  was  there  a  light  plaited 
screen,  which  could  be  moved  and  fixed  in  different  places 
according  to  the  wind. 

Pippin  went  on  talking  for  a  while.  ‘I  hope,  if  I  do  go  to 
sleep  in  this  bird-loft,  that  I  shan’t  roll  off,’  he  said. 

‘Once  I  do  get  to  sleep,’  said  Sam,  ‘I  shall  go  on  sleeping, 
whether  I  roll  off  or  no.  And  the  less  said,  the  sooner  I’ll  drop 
off,  if  you  take  my  meaning.’ 

Frodo  lay  for  some  time  awake,  and  looked  up  at  the  stars 
glinting  through  the  pale  roof  of  quivering  leaves.  Sam  was 
snoring  at  his  side  long  before  he  himself  closed  his  eyes.  He 
could  dimly  see  the  grey  forms  of  two  elves  sitting  motionless 
with  their  arms  about  their  knees,  speaking  in  whispers.  The 
other  had  gone  down  to  take  up  his  watch  on  one  of  the  lower 
branches.  At  last  lulled  by  the  wind  in  the  boughs  above,  and 
the  sweet  murmur  of  the  falls  of  Nimrodel  below,  Frodo  fell 
asleep  with  the  song  of  Legolas  running  in  his  mind. 

Late  in  the  night  he  woke.  The  other  hobbits  were  asleep. 
The  Elves  were  gone.  The  sickle  Moon  was  gleaming  dimly 
among  the  leaves.  The  wind  was  still.  A  little  way  off  he  heard 
a  harsh  laugh  and  the  tread  of  many  feet  on  the  ground 
below.  There  was  a  ring  of  metal.  The  sounds  died  slowly 
away,  and  seemed  to  go  southward,  on  into  the  wood. 


LOTHLORIEN 


449 


A  head  appeared  suddenly  through  the  hole  in  the  flet. 
Frodo  sat  up  in  alarm  and  saw  that  it  was  a  grey-hooded  Elf. 
He  looked  towards  the  hobbits. 

‘What  is  it?’  said  Frodo. 

‘Yrch!’  said  the  Elf  in  a  hissing  whisper,  and  cast  on  to  the 
flet  the  rope-ladder  rolled  up. 

‘Ores!’  said  Frodo.  ‘What  are  they  doing?’  But  the  Elf  had 
gone. 

There  were  no  more  sounds.  Even  the  leaves  were  silent, 
and  the  very  falls  seemed  to  be  hushed.  Frodo  sat  and  shiv¬ 
ered  in  his  wraps.  He  was  thankful  that  they  had  not  been 
caught  on  the  ground;  but  he  felt  that  the  trees  offered  little 
protection,  except  concealment.  Ores  were  as  keen  as  hounds 
on  a  scent,  it  was  said,  but  they  could  also  climb.  He  drew 
out  Sting:  it  flashed  and  glittered  like  a  blue  flame;  and  then 
slowly  faded  again  and  grew  dull.  In  spite  of  the  fading  of  his 
sword  the  feeling  of  immediate  danger  did  not  leave  Frodo, 
rather  it  grew  stronger.  He  got  up  and  crawled  to  the  opening 
and  peered  down.  He  was  almost  certain  that  he  could  hear 
stealthy  movements  at  the  tree’s  foot  far  below. 

Not  Elves;  for  the  woodland  folk  were  altogether  noiseless 
in  their  movements.  Then  he  heard  faintly  a  sound  like 
sniffing;  and  something  seemed  to  be  scrabbling  on  the  bark 
of  the  tree-trunk.  He  stared  down  into  the  dark,  holding  his 
breath. 

Something  was  now  climbing  slowly,  and  its  breath  came 
like  a  soft  hissing  through  closed  teeth.  Then  coming  up, 
close  to  the  stem,  Frodo  saw  two  pale  eyes.  They  stopped 
and  gazed  upward  unwinking.  Suddenly  they  turned  away, 
and  a  shadowy  figure  slipped  round  the  trunk  of  the  tree  and 
vanished. 

Immediately  afterwards  Haldir  came  climbing  swiftly  up 
through  the  branches.  ‘There  was  something  in  this  tree  that 
I  have  never  seen  before,’  he  said.  ‘It  was  not  an  ore.  It  fled 
as  soon  as  I  touched  the  tree-stem.  It  seemed  to  be  wary,  and 
to  have  some  skill  in  trees,  or  I  might  have  thought  that  it 
was  one  of  you  hobbits. 


450 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘I  did  not  shoot,  for  I  dared  not  arouse  any  cries:  we  cannot 
risk  battle.  A  strong  company  of  Ores  has  passed.  They 
crossed  the  Nimrodel  -  curse  their  foul  feet  in  its  clean  water! 
-  and  went  on  down  the  old  road  beside  the  river.  They 
seemed  to  pick  up  some  scent,  and  they  searched  the  ground 
for  a  while  near  the  place  where  you  halted.  The  three  of  us 
could  not  challenge  a  hundred,  so  we  went  ahead  and  spoke 
with  feigned  voices,  leading  them  on  into  the  wood. 

‘Orophin  has  now  gone  in  haste  back  to  our  dwellings  to 
warn  our  people.  None  of  the  Ores  will  ever  return  out  of 
Lorien.  And  there  will  be  many  Elves  hidden  on  the  northern 
border  before  another  night  falls.  But  you  must  take  the  road 
south  as  soon  as  it  is  fully  light.’ 

Day  came  pale  from  the  East.  As  the  light  grew  it  filtered 
through  the  yellow  leaves  of  the  mallorn,  and  it  seemed  to 
the  hobbits  that  the  early  sun  of  a  cool  summer’s  morning  was 
shining.  Pale-blue  sky  peeped  among  the  moving  branches. 
Looking  through  an  opening  on  the  south  side  of  the  flet 
Frodo  saw  all  the  valley  of  the  Silverlode  lying  like  a  sea  of 
fallow  gold  tossing  gently  in  the  breeze. 

The  morning  was  still  young  and  cold  when  the  Company 
set  out  again,  guided  now  by  Haldir  and  his  brother  Rumil. 
‘Farewell,  sweet  Nimrodel!’  cried  Legolas.  Frodo  looked  back 
and  caught  a  gleam  of  white  foam  among  the  grey  tree-stems. 
‘Farewell,’  he  said.  It  seemed  to  him  that  he  would  never 
hear  again  a  running  water  so  beautiful,  for  ever  blending  its 
innumerable  notes  in  an  endless  changeful  music. 

They  went  back  to  the  path  that  still  went  on  along  the 
west  side  of  the  Silverlode,  and  for  some  way  they  followed 
it  southward.  There  were  the  prints  of  orc-feet  in  the  earth. 
But  soon  Haldir  turned  aside  into  the  trees  and  halted  on  the 
bank  of  the  river  under  their  shadows. 

‘There  is  one  of  my  people  yonder  across  the  stream,’  he 
said,  ‘though  you  may  not  see  him.’  He  gave  a  call  like  the 
low  whistle  of  a  bird,  and  out  of  a  thicket  of  young  trees  an 
Elf  stepped,  clad  in  grey,  but  with  his  hood  thrown  back;  his 


LOTHLORIEN 


451 


hair  glinted  like  gold  in  the  morning  sun.  Haldir  skilfully  cast 
over  the  stream  a  coil  of  grey  rope,  and  he  caught  it  and 
bound  the  end  about  a  tree  near  the  hank. 

‘Celebrant  is  already  a  strong  stream  here,  as  you  see,’  said 
Haldir,  ‘and  it  runs  both  swift  and  deep,  and  is  very  cold.  We 
do  not  set  foot  in  it  so  far  north,  unless  we  must.  But  in  these 
days  of  watchfulness  we  do  not  make  bridges.  This  is  how 
we  cross!  Follow  me!’  He  made  his  end  of  the  rope  fast  about 
another  tree,  and  then  ran  lightly  along  it,  over  the  river  and 
back  again,  as  if  he  were  on  a  road. 

‘I  can  walk  this  path,’  said  Legolas;  ‘but  the  others  have 
not  this  skill.  Must  they  swim?’ 

‘No!’  said  Haldir.  ‘We  have  two  more  ropes.  We  will  fasten 
them  above  the  other,  one  shoulder-high,  and  another  half- 
high,  and  holding  these  the  strangers  should  be  able  to  cross 
with  care.’ 

When  this  slender  bridge  had  been  made,  the  Company 
passed  over,  some  cautiously  and  slowly,  others  more  easily. 
Of  the  hobbits  Pippin  proved  the  best  for  he  was  sure-footed, 
and  he  walked  over  quickly,  holding  only  with  one  hand;  but 
he  kept  his  eyes  on  the  bank  ahead  and  did  not  look  down. 
Sam  shuffled  along,  clutching  hard,  and  looking  down  into 
the  pale  eddying  water  as  if  it  was  a  chasm  in  the  mountains. 

He  breathed  with  relief  when  he  was  safely  across.  ‘Live 
and  learn!  as  my  gaffer  used  to  say.  Though  he  was  thinking 
of  gardening,  not  of  roosting  like  a  bird,  nor  of  trying  to  walk 
like  a  spider.  Not  even  my  uncle  Andy  ever  did  a  trick  like 
that!’ 

When  at  length  all  the  Company  was  gathered  on  the  east 
bank  of  the  Silverlode,  the  Elves  untied  the  ropes  and  coiled 
two  of  them.  Rumil,  who  had  remained  on  the  other  side, 
drew  back  the  last  one,  slung  it  on  his  shoulder,  and  with  a 
wave  of  his  hand  went  away,  back  to  Nimrodel  to  keep  watch. 

‘Now,  friends,’  said  Haldir,  ‘you  have  entered  the  Naith  of 
Lorien,  or  the  Gore,  as  you  would  say,  for  it  is  the  land 
that  lies  like  a  spearhead  between  the  arms  of  Silverlode  and 
Anduin  the  Great.  We  allow  no  strangers  to  spy  out  the 


452 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


secrets  of  the  Naith.  Few  indeed  are  permitted  even  to  set 
foot  there. 

‘As  was  agreed,  I  shall  here  blindfold  the  eyes  of  Gimli  the 
Dwarf.  The  others  may  walk  free  for  a  while,  until  we  come 
nearer  to  our  dwellings,  down  in  Egladil,  in  the  Angle  between 
the  waters.’ 

This  was  not  at  all  to  the  liking  of  Gimli.  ‘The  agreement  was 
made  without  my  consent,’  he  said.  ‘I  will  not  walk  blindfold, 
like  a  beggar  or  a  prisoner.  And  I  am  no  spy.  My  folk  have  never 
had  dealings  with  any  of  the  servants  of  the  Enemy.  Neither 
have  we  done  harm  to  the  Elves.  I  am  no  more  likely  to  betray 
you  than  Legolas,  or  any  other  of  my  companions.’ 

‘I  do  not  doubt  you,’  said  Hal  dir.  ‘Yet  this  is  our  law.  I  am 
not  the  master  of  the  law,  and  cannot  set  it  aside.  I  have  done 
much  in  letting  you  set  foot  over  Celebrant.  ’ 

Gimli  was  obstinate.  He  planted  his  feet  firmly  apart,  and 
laid  his  hand  upon  the  haft  of  his  axe.  ‘I  will  go  forward  free,’ 
he  said,  ‘or  I  will  go  back  and  seek  my  own  land,  where  I 
am  known  to  be  true  of  word,  though  I  perish  alone  in  the 
wilderness.’ 

‘You  cannot  go  back,’  said  Haldir  sternly.  ‘Now  you  have 
come  thus  far,  you  must  be  brought  before  the  Lord  and  the 
Lady.  They  shall  judge  you,  to  hold  you  or  to  give  you  leave, 
as  they  will.  You  cannot  cross  the  rivers  again,  and  behind 
you  there  are  now  secret  sentinels  that  you  cannot  pass.  You 
would  be  slain  before  you  saw  them.’ 

Gimli  drew  his  axe  from  his  belt.  Haldir  and  his  companion 
bent  their  bows.  ‘A  plague  on  Dwarves  and  their  stiff  necks!’ 
said  Legolas. 

‘Come!’  said  Aragorn.  ‘If  I  am  still  to  lead  this  Company, 
you  must  do  as  I  bid.  It  is  hard  upon  the  Dwarf  to  be  thus 
singled  out.  We  will  all  be  blindfold,  even  Legolas.  That  will 
be  best,  though  it  will  make  the  journey  slow  and  dull.’ 

Gimli  laughed  suddenly.  ‘A  merry  troop  of  fools  we  shall 
look!  Will  Haldir  lead  us  all  on  a  string,  like  many  blind 
beggars  with  one  dog?  But  I  will  be  content,  if  only  Legolas 
here  shares  my  blindness.’ 


LOTHLORIEN  453 

‘I  am  an  Elf  and  a  kinsman  here,’  said  Legolas,  becoming 
angry  in  his  turn. 

‘Now  let  us  cry:  “a  plague  on  the  stiff  necks  of  Elves!”’ 
said  Aragorn.  ‘But  the  Company  shall  all  fare  alike.  Come, 
bind  our  eyes,  Haldir!’ 

‘I  shall  claim  full  amends  for  every  fall  and  stubbed  toe,  if 
you  do  not  lead  us  well,’  said  Gimli  as  they  bound  a  cloth 
about  his  eyes. 

‘You  will  have  no  claim,’  said  Haldir.  ‘I  shall  lead  you  well, 
and  the  paths  are  smooth  and  straight.’ 

‘Alas  for  the  folly  of  these  days!’  said  Legolas.  ‘Here  all  are 
enemies  of  the  one  Enemy,  and  yet  I  must  walk  blind,  while 
the  sun  is  merry  in  the  woodland  under  leaves  of  gold!’ 

‘Folly  it  may  seem,’  said  Haldir.  ‘Indeed  in  nothing  is  the 
power  of  the  Dark  Lord  more  clearly  shown  than  in  the 
estrangement  that  divides  all  those  who  still  oppose  him.  Yet 
so  little  faith  and  trust  do  we  find  now  in  the  world  beyond 
Lothlorien,  unless  maybe  in  Rivendell,  that  we  dare  not  by 
our  own  trust  endanger  our  land.  We  live  now  upon  an  island 
amid  many  perils,  and  our  hands  are  more  often  upon  the 
bowstring  than  upon  the  harp. 

‘The  rivers  long  defended  us,  but  they  are  a  sure  guard  no 
more;  for  the  Shadow  has  crept  northward  all  about  us.  Some 
speak  of  departing,  yet  for  that  it  already  seems  too  late.  The 
mountains  to  the  west  are  growing  evil;  to  the  east  the  lands 
are  waste,  and  full  of  Sauron’s  creatures;  and  it  is  rumoured 
that  we  cannot  now  safely  pass  southward  through  Rohan, 
and  the  mouths  of  the  Great  River  are  watched  by  the  Enemy. 
Even  if  we  could  come  to  the  shores  of  the  Sea,  we  should 
find  no  longer  any  shelter  there.  It  is  said  that  there  are  still 
havens  of  the  High  Elves,  but  they  are  far  north  and  west, 
beyond  the  land  of  the  Halflings.  But  where  that  may  be, 
though  the  Lord  and  Lady  may  know,  I  do  not.’ 

‘You  ought  at  least  to  guess,  since  you  have  seen  us,’  said 
Merry.  ‘There  are  Elf-havens  west  of  my  land,  the  Shire, 
where  Hobbits  live.’ 

‘Happy  folk  are  Hobbits  to  dwell  near  the  shores  of  the 


454 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


sea!’  said  Haldir.  ‘It  is  long  indeed  since  any  of  my  folk  have 
looked  on  it,  yet  still  we  remember  it  in  song.  Tell  me  of  these 
havens  as  we  walk.  ’ 

‘I  cannot,’  said  Merry.  ‘I  have  never  seen  them.  I  have 
never  been  out  of  my  own  land  before.  And  if  I  had  known 
what  the  world  outside  was  like,  I  don’t  think  I  should  have 
had  the  heart  to  leave  it.’ 

‘Not  even  to  see  fair  Lothlorien?’  said  Haldir.  ‘The  world 
is  indeed  full  of  peril,  and  in  it  there  are  many  dark  places; 
but  still  there  is  much  that  is  fair,  and  though  in  all  lands  love 
is  now  mingled  with  grief,  it  grows  perhaps  the  greater. 

‘Some  there  are  among  us  who  sing  that  the  Shadow  will 
draw  back,  and  peace  shall  come  again.  Yet  I  do  not  believe 
that  the  world  about  us  will  ever  again  be  as  it  was  of  old,  or 
the  light  of  the  Sun  as  it  was  aforetime.  For  the  Elves,  I  fear, 
it  will  prove  at  best  a  truce,  in  which  they  may  pass  to  the 
Sea  unhindered  and  leave  the  Middle-earth  for  ever.  Alas  for 
Lothlorien  that  I  love!  It  would  be  a  poor  life  in  a  land  where 
no  mallorn  grew.  But  if  there  are  mallorn-trees  beyond  the 
Great  Sea,  none  have  reported  it.’ 

As  they  spoke  thus,  the  Company  filed  slowly  along  the 
paths  in  the  wood,  led  by  Haldir,  while  the  other  Elf  walked 
behind.  They  felt  the  ground  beneath  their  feet  smooth  and 
soft,  and  after  a  while  they  walked  more  freely,  without  fear 
of  hurt  or  fall.  Being  deprived  of  sight,  Frodo  found  his 
hearing  and  other  senses  sharpened.  He  could  smell  the  trees 
and  the  trodden  grass.  He  could  hear  many  different  notes 
in  the  rustle  of  the  leaves  overhead,  the  river  murmuring 
away  on  his  right,  and  the  thin  clear  voices  of  birds  high  in 
the  sky.  He  felt  the  sun  upon  his  face  and  hands  when  they 
passed  through  an  open  glade. 

As  soon  as  he  set  foot  upon  the  far  bank  of  Silverlode  a 
strange  feeling  had  come  upon  him,  and  it  deepened  as  he 
walked  on  into  the  Naith:  it  seemed  to  him  that  he  had 
stepped  over  a  bridge  of  time  into  a  corner  of  the  Elder 
Days,  and  was  now  walking  in  a  world  that  was  no  more.  In 
Rivendell  there  was  memory  of  ancient  things;  in  Lorien  the 


LOTHLORIEN 


455 


ancient  things  still  lived  on  in  the  waking  world.  Evil  had 
been  seen  and  heard  there,  sorrow  had  been  known;  the  Elves 
feared  and  distrusted  the  world  outside:  wolves  were  howling 
on  the  wood’s  borders:  but  on  the  land  of  Lorien  no  shadow 
lay. 

All  that  day  the  Company  marched  on,  until  they  felt  the 
cool  evening  come  and  heard  the  early  night-wind  whispering 
among  many  leaves.  Then  they  rested  and  slept  without  fear 
upon  the  ground;  for  their  guides  would  not  permit  them  to 
unbind  their  eyes,  and  they  could  not  climb.  In  the  morning 
they  went  on  again,  walking  without  haste.  At  noon  they 
halted,  and  Frodo  was  aware  that  they  had  passed  out  under 
the  shining  Sun.  Suddenly  he  heard  the  sound  of  many  voices 
all  around  him. 

A  marching  host  of  Elves  had  come  up  silently:  they  were 
hastening  towards  the  northern  borders  to  guard  against  any 
attack  from  Moria;  and  they  brought  news,  some  of  which 
Haldir  reported.  The  marauding  ores  had  been  waylaid  and 
almost  all  destroyed;  the  remnant  had  fled  westward  towards 
the  mountains,  and  were  being  pursued.  A  strange  creature 
also  had  been  seen,  running  with  bent  back  and  with  hands 
near  the  ground,  like  a  beast  and  yet  not  of  beast-shape.  It 
had  eluded  capture,  and  they  had  not  shot  it,  not  knowing 
whether  it  was  good  or  ill,  and  it  had  vanished  down  the 
Silverlode  southward. 

‘Also,’  said  Haldir,  ‘they  bring  me  a  message  from  the  Lord 
and  Lady  of  the  Galadhrim.  You  are  all  to  walk  free,  even 
the  dwarf  Gimli.  It  seems  that  the  Lady  knows  who  and  what 
is  each  member  of  your  Company.  New  messages  have  come 
from  Rivendell  perhaps.’ 

He  removed  the  bandage  first  from  Gimli’s  eyes.  ‘Your 
pardon!’  he  said,  bowing  low.  ‘Look  on  us  now  with  friendly 
eyes!  Look  and  be  glad,  for  you  are  the  first  dwarf  to  behold 
the  trees  of  the  Naith  of  Lorien  since  Durin’s  Day!’ 

When  his  eyes  were  in  turn  uncovered,  Frodo  looked  up 
and  caught  his  breath.  They  were  standing  in  an  open  space. 


456 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


To  the  left  stood  a  great  mound,  covered  with  a  sward  of 
grass  as  green  as  Springtime  in  the  Elder  Days.  Upon  it,  as 
a  double  crown,  grew  two  circles  of  trees:  the  outer  had  bark 
of  snowy  white,  and  were  leafless  but  beautiful  in  their 
shapely  nakedness;  the  inner  were  mallorn-trees  of  great 
height,  still  arrayed  in  pale  gold.  High  amid  the  branches  of 
a  towering  tree  that  stood  in  the  centre  of  all  there  gleamed 
a  white  flet.  At  the  feet  of  the  trees,  and  all  about  the  green 
hillsides  the  grass  was  studded  with  small  golden  flowers 
shaped  like  stars.  Among  them,  nodding  on  slender  stalks, 
were  other  flowers,  white  and  palest  green:  they  glimmered 
as  a  mist  amid  the  rich  hue  of  the  grass.  Over  all  the  sky  was 
blue,  and  the  sun  of  afternoon  glowed  upon  the  hill  and  cast 
long  green  shadows  beneath  the  trees. 

‘Behold!  You  are  come  to  Cerin  Amroth,’  said  Haldir.  ‘For 
this  is  the  heart  of  the  ancient  realm  as  it  was  long  ago,  and 
here  is  the  mound  of  Amroth,  where  in  happier  days  his  high 
house  was  built.  Here  ever  bloom  the  winter  flowers  in  the 
unfading  grass:  the  yellow  elanor,  and  the  pale  niphredil.  Here 
we  will  stay  awhile,  and  come  to  the  city  of  the  Galadhrim 
at  dusk.’ 

The  others  cast  themselves  down  upon  the  fragrant  grass, 
but  Frodo  stood  awhile  still  lost  in  wonder.  It  seemed  to  him 
that  he  had  stepped  through  a  high  window  that  looked  on  a 
vanished  world.  A  light  was  upon  it  for  which  his  language 
had  no  name.  All  that  he  saw  was  shapely,  but  the  shapes 
seemed  at  once  clear  cut,  as  if  they  had  been  first  conceived 
and  drawn  at  the  uncovering  of  his  eyes,  and  ancient  as  if 
they  had  endured  for  ever.  He  saw  no  colour  but  those  he 
knew,  gold  and  white  and  blue  and  green,  but  they  were  fresh 
and  poignant,  as  if  he  had  at  that  moment  first  perceived 
them  and  made  for  them  names  new  and  wonderful.  In  winter 
here  no  heart  could  mourn  for  summer  or  for  spring.  No 
blemish  or  sickness  or  deformity  could  be  seen  in  anything 
that  grew  upon  the  earth.  On  the  land  of  Lorien  there  was 
no  stain. 


LOTHLORIEN 


457 


He  turned  and  saw  that  Sam  was  now  standing  beside  him, 
looking  round  with  a  puzzled  expression,  and  rubbing  his 
eyes  as  if  he  was  not  sure  that  he  was  awake.  ‘It’s  sunlight 
and  bright  day,  right  enough,’  he  said.  ‘I  thought  that  Elves 
were  all  for  moon  and  stars:  but  this  is  more  Elvish  than 
anything  I  ever  heard  tell  of.  I  feel  as  if  I  was  inside  a  song,  if 
you  take  my  meaning.’ 

Haldir  looked  at  them,  and  he  seemed  indeed  to  take  the 
meaning  of  both  thought  and  word.  He  smiled.  ‘You  feel  the 
power  of  the  Lady  of  the  Galadhrim,’  he  said.  ‘Would  it 
please  you  to  climb  with  me  up  Cerin  Amroth?’ 

They  followed  him  as  he  stepped  lightly  up  the  grass-clad 
slopes.  Though  he  walked  and  breathed,  and  about  him  living 
leaves  and  flowers  were  stirred  by  the  same  cool  wind  as 
fanned  his  face,  Frodo  felt  that  he  was  in  a  timeless  land  that 
did  not  fade  or  change  or  fall  into  forgetfulness.  When  he 
had  gone  and  passed  again  into  the  outer  world,  still  Frodo 
the  wanderer  from  the  Shire  would  walk  there,  upon  the  grass 
among  elanor  and  niphredil  in  fair  Lothlorien. 

They  entered  the  circle  of  white  trees.  As  they  did  so  the 
South  Wind  blew  upon  Cerin  Amroth  and  sighed  among  the 
branches.  Frodo  stood  still,  hearing  far  off  great  seas  upon 
beaches  that  had  long  ago  been  washed  away,  and  sea-birds 
crying  whose  race  had  perished  from  the  earth. 

Haldir  had  gone  on  and  was  now  climbing  to  the  high  flet. 
As  Frodo  prepared  to  follow  him,  he  laid  his  hand  upon  the 
tree  beside  the  ladder:  never  before  had  he  been  so  suddenly 
and  so  keenly  aware  of  the  feel  and  texture  of  a  tree’s  skin 
and  of  the  life  within  it.  He  felt  a  delight  in  wood  and  the 
touch  of  it,  neither  as  forester  nor  as  carpenter;  it  was  the 
delight  of  the  living  tree  itself. 

As  he  stepped  out  at  last  upon  the  lofty  platform,  Haldir 
took  his  hand  and  turned  him  towards  the  South.  ‘Look  this 
way  first!’  he  said. 

Frodo  looked  and  saw,  still  at  some  distance,  a  hill  of  many 
mighty  trees,  or  a  city  of  green  towers:  which  it  was  he  could 
not  tell.  Out  of  it,  it  seemed  to  him  that  the  power  and  light 


458 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


came  that  held  all  the  land  in  sway.  He  longed  suddenly  to 
fly  like  a  bird  to  rest  in  the  green  city.  Then  he  looked  east¬ 
ward  and  saw  all  the  land  of  Lorien  running  down  to  the  pale 
gleam  of  Anduin,  the  Great  River.  He  lifted  his  eyes  across 
the  river  and  all  the  light  went  out,  and  he  was  back  again  in 
the  world  he  knew.  Beyond  the  river  the  land  appeared  flat 
and  empty,  formless  and  vague,  until  far  away  it  rose  again 
like  a  wall,  dark  and  drear.  The  sun  that  lay  on  Lothlorien 
had  no  power  to  enlighten  the  shadow  of  that  distant  height. 

‘There  lies  the  fastness  of  Southern  Mirkwood,’  said 
Haldir.  ‘It  is  clad  in  a  forest  of  dark  fir,  where  the  trees  strive 
one  against  another  and  their  branches  rot  and  wither.  In  the 
midst  upon  a  stony  height  stands  Dol  Guldur,  where  long 
the  hidden  Enemy  had  his  dwelling.  We  fear  that  now  it  is 
inhabited  again,  and  with  power  sevenfold.  A  black  cloud  lies 
often  over  it  of  late.  In  this  high  place  you  may  see  the  two 
powers  that  are  opposed  one  to  another;  and  ever  they  strive 
now  in  thought,  but  whereas  the  light  perceives  the  very  heart 
of  the  darkness,  its  own  secret  has  not  been  discovered.  Not 
yet.’  He  turned  and  climbed  swiftly  down,  and  they  followed 
him. 

At  the  hill’s  foot  Frodo  found  Aragorn,  standing  still  and 
silent  as  a  tree;  but  in  his  hand  was  a  small  golden  bloom  of 
elanor,  and  a  light  was  in  his  eyes.  He  was  wrapped  in  some 
fair  memory:  and  as  Frodo  looked  at  him  he  knew  that  he 
beheld  things  as  they  once  had  been  in  this  same  place.  For 
the  grim  years  were  removed  from  the  face  of  Aragorn,  and 
he  seemed  clothed  in  white,  a  young  lord  tall  and  fair;  and 
he  spoke  words  in  the  Elvish  tongue  to  one  whom  Frodo 
could  not  see.  Arwen  vanimelda,  namarie!  he  said,  and  then 
he  drew  a  breath,  and  returning  out  of  his  thought  he  looked 
at  Frodo  and  smiled. 

‘Here  is  the  heart  of  Elvendom  on  earth,’  he  said,  ‘and  here 
my  heart  dwells  ever,  unless  there  be  a  light  beyond  the  dark 
roads  that  we  still  must  tread,  you  and  I.  Come  with  me!’ 
And  taking  Frodo’s  hand  in  his,  he  left  the  hill  of  Cerin 
Amroth  and  came  there  never  again  as  living  man. 


Chapter  7 


THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL 


The  sun  was  sinking  behind  the  mountains,  and  the  shadows 
were  deepening  in  the  woods,  when  they  went  on  again. 
Their  paths  now  went  into  thickets  where  the  dusk  had 
already  gathered.  Night  came  beneath  the  trees  as  they 
walked,  and  the  Elves  uncovered  their  silver  lamps. 

Suddenly  they  came  out  into  the  open  again  and  found 
themselves  under  a  pale  evening  sky  pricked  by  a  few  early 
stars.  There  was  a  wide  treeless  space  before  them,  running 
in  a  great  circle  and  bending  away  on  either  hand.  Beyond  it 
was  a  deep  fosse  lost  in  soft  shadow,  but  the  grass  upon  its 
brink  was  green,  as  if  it  glowed  still  in  memory  of  the  sun 
that  had  gone.  Upon  the  further  side  there  rose  to  a  great 
height  a  green  wall  encircling  a  green  hill  thronged  with 
mallorn-trees  taller  than  any  they  had  yet  seen  in  all  the 
land.  Their  height  could  not  be  guessed,  but  they  stood 
up  in  the  twilight  like  living  towers.  In  their  many-tiered 
branches  and  amid  their  ever-moving  leaves  countless  lights 
were  gleaming,  green  and  gold  and  silver.  Haldir  turned 
towards  the  Company. 

‘Welcome  to  Caras  Galadhon!’  he  said.  ‘Here  is  the  city  of 
the  Galadhrim  where  dwell  the  Lord  Celeborn  and  Galadriel 
the  Lady  of  Lorien.  But  we  cannot  enter  here,  for  the  gates 
do  not  look  northward.  We  must  go  round  to  the  southern 
side,  and  the  way  is  not  short,  for  the  city  is  great.’ 

There  was  a  road  paved  with  white  stone  running  on  the 
outer  brink  of  the  fosse.  Along  this  they  went  westward,  with 
the  city  ever  climbing  up  like  a  green  cloud  upon  their  left; 
and  as  the  night  deepened  more  lights  sprang  forth,  until  all 
the  hill  seemed  afire  with  stars.  They  came  at  last  to  a  white 


460  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

bridge,  and  crossing  found  the  great  gates  of  the  city:  they 
faced  south-west,  set  between  the  ends  of  the  encircling  wall 
that  here  overlapped,  and  they  were  tall  and  strong,  and  hung 
with  many  lamps. 

Haldir  knocked  and  spoke,  and  the  gates  opened  sound¬ 
lessly;  but  of  guards  Frodo  could  see  no  sign.  The  travellers 
passed  within,  and  the  gates  shut  behind  them.  They  were  in 
a  deep  lane  between  the  ends  of  the  wall,  and  passing  quickly 
through  it  they  entered  the  City  of  the  Trees.  No  folk  could 
they  see,  nor  hear  any  feet  upon  the  paths;  but  there  were 
many  voices,  about  them,  and  in  the  air  above.  Far  away  up 
on  the  hill  they  could  hear  the  sound  of  singing  falling  from 
on  high  like  soft  rain  upon  leaves. 

They  went  along  many  paths  and  climbed  many  stairs, 
until  they  came  to  the  high  places  and  saw  before  them  amid 
a  wide  lawn  a  fountain  shimmering.  It  was  lit  by  silver  lamps 
that  swung  from  the  boughs  of  trees,  and  it  fell  into  a  basin 
of  silver,  from  which  a  white  stream  spilled.  Upon  the  south 
side  of  the  lawn  there  stood  the  mightiest  of  all  the  trees;  its 
great  smooth  bole  gleamed  like  grey  silk,  and  up  it  towered, 
until  its  first  branches,  far  above,  opened  their  huge  limbs 
under  shadowy  clouds  of  leaves.  Beside  it  a  broad  white 
ladder  stood,  and  at  its  foot  three  Elves  were  seated.  They 
sprang  up  as  the  travellers  approached,  and  Frodo  saw  that 
they  were  tall  and  clad  in  grey  mail,  and  from  their  shoulders 
hung  long  white  cloaks. 

‘Flere  dwell  Celeborn  and  Galadriel,’  said  Flaldir.  ‘It  is  their 
wish  that  you  should  ascend  and  speak  with  them.’ 

One  of  the  Elf-wardens  then  blew  a  clear  note  on  a  small 
horn,  and  it  was  answered  three  times  from  far  above.  ‘I  will 
go  first,’  said  Haldir.  ‘Let  Frodo  come  next  and  with  him 
Legolas.  The  others  may  follow  as  they  wish.  It  is  a  long 
climb  for  those  that  are  not  accustomed  to  such  stairs,  but 
you  may  rest  upon  the  way.’ 

As  he  climbed  slowly  up  Frodo  passed  many  flets:  some 
on  one  side,  some  on  another,  and  some  set  about  the  bole 


THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL  461 

of  the  tree,  so  that  the  ladder  passed  through  them.  At  a  great 
height  above  the  ground  he  came  to  a  wide  talan,  like  the 
deck  of  a  great  ship.  On  it  was  built  a  house,  so  large  that 
almost  it  would  have  served  for  a  hall  of  Men  upon  the 
earth.  He  entered  behind  Haldir,  and  found  that  he  was  in  a 
chamber  of  oval  shape,  in  the  midst  of  which  grew  the  trunk 
of  the  great  mallorn,  now  tapering  towards  its  crown,  and  yet 
making  still  a  pillar  of  wide  girth. 

The  chamber  was  filled  with  a  soft  light;  its  walls  were 
green  and  silver  and  its  roof  of  gold.  Many  Elves  were  seated 
there.  On  two  chairs  beneath  the  bole  of  the  tree  and  canopied 
by  a  living  bough  there  sat,  side  by  side,  Celeborn  and 
Galadriel.  They  stood  up  to  greet  their  guests,  after  the 
manner  of  Elves,  even  those  who  were  accounted  mighty 
kings.  Very  tall  they  were,  and  the  Lady  no  less  tall  than  the 
Lord;  and  they  were  grave  and  beautiful.  They  were  clad 
wholly  in  white;  and  the  hair  of  the  Lady  was  of  deep  gold, 
and  the  hair  of  the  Lord  Celeborn  was  of  silver  long  and 
bright;  but  no  sign  of  age  was  upon  them,  unless  it  were  in 
the  depths  of  their  eyes;  for  these  were  keen  as  lances  in  the 
starlight,  and  yet  profound,  the  wells  of  deep  memory. 

Haldir  led  Frodo  before  them,  and  the  Lord  welcomed  him 
in  his  own  tongue.  The  Lady  Galadriel  said  no  word  but 
looked  long  upon  his  face. 

‘Sit  now  beside  my  chair,  Frodo  of  the  Shire!’  said  Cele¬ 
born.  ‘When  all  have  come  we  will  speak  together.’ 

Each  of  the  companions  he  greeted  courteously  by  name 
as  they  entered.  ‘Welcome  Aragorn  son  of  Arathorn!’  he  said. 
‘It  is  eight  and  thirty  years  of  the  world  outside  since  you 
came  to  this  land;  and  those  years  lie  heavy  on  you.  But  the 
end  is  near,  for  good  or  ill.  Here  lay  aside  your  burden  for  a 
while!’ 

Welcome  son  of  Thranduil!  Too  seldom  do  my  kindred 
journey  hither  from  the  North.’ 

‘Welcome  Gimli  son  of  Gloin!  It  is  long  indeed  since  we 
saw  one  of  Durin’s  folk  in  Caras  Galadhon.  But  today  we 
have  broken  our  long  law.  May  it  be  a  sign  that  though  the 


462  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

world  is  now  dark  better  days  are  at  hand,  and  that  friendship 
shall  be  renewed  between  our  peoples.’  Gimli  bowed  low. 

When  all  the  guests  were  seated  before  his  chair  the  Lord 
looked  at  them  again.  ‘Here  there  are  eight,’  he  said.  ‘Nine 
were  to  set  out:  so  said  the  messages.  But  maybe  there  has 
been  some  change  of  counsel  that  we  have  not  heard.  Elrond 
is  far  away,  and  darkness  gathers  between  us,  and  all  this  year 
the  shadows  have  grown  longer.’ 

‘Nay,  there  was  no  change  of  counsel,’  said  the  Lady 
Galadriel,  speaking  for  the  first  time.  Her  voice  was  clear  and 
musical,  but  deeper  than  woman’s  wont.  ‘Gandalf  the  Grey 
set  out  with  the  Company,  but  he  did  not  pass  the  borders 
of  this  land.  Now  tell  us  where  he  is;  for  I  much  desired  to 
speak  with  him  again.  But  I  cannot  see  him  from  afar,  unless 
he  comes  within  the  fences  of  Lothlorien:  a  grey  mist  is  about 
him,  and  the  ways  of  his  feet  and  of  his  mind  are  hidden 
from  me.’ 

‘Alas!’  said  Aragorn.  ‘Gandalf  the  Grey  fell  into  shadow. 
He  remained  in  Moria  and  did  not  escape.’ 

At  these  words  all  the  Elves  in  the  hall  cried  aloud  in  grief 
and  amazement.  ‘These  are  evil  tidings,’  said  Celeborn,  ‘the 
most  evil  that  have  been  spoken  here  in  long  years  full  of 
grievous  deeds.’  He  turned  to  Haldir.  ‘Why  has  nothing  of 
this  been  told  to  me  before?’  he  asked  in  the  elven-tongue. 

‘We  have  not  spoken  to  Haldir  of  our  deeds  or  our  pur¬ 
pose,’  said  Legolas.  ‘At  first  we  were  weary  and  danger  was 
too  close  behind;  and  afterwards  we  almost  forgot  our  grief 
for  a  time,  as  we  walked  in  gladness  on  the  fair  paths  of 
Lorien.’ 

‘Yet  our  grief  is  great  and  our  loss  cannot  be  mended,’  said 
Frodo.  ‘Gandalf  was  our  guide,  and  he  led  us  through  Moria; 
and  when  our  escape  seemed  beyond  hope  he  saved  us,  and 
he  fell.’ 

‘Tell  us  now  the  full  tale!’  said  Celeborn. 

Then  Aragorn  recounted  all  that  had  happened  upon  the 
pass  of  Caradhras,  and  in  the  days  that  followed;  and  he 


THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL  463 

spoke  of  Balin  and  his  book,  and  the  fight  in  the  Chamber 
of  Mazarbul,  and  the  fire,  and  the  narrow  bridge,  and  the 
coming  of  the  Terror.  ‘An  evil  of  the  Ancient  World  it 
seemed,  such  as  I  have  never  seen  before,’  said  Aragorn.  ‘It 
was  both  a  shadow  and  a  flame,  strong  and  terrible.’ 

‘It  was  a  Balrog  of  Morgoth,’  said  Legolas;  ‘of  all  elf-banes 
the  most  deadly,  save  the  One  who  sits  in  the  Dark  Tower.’ 

‘Indeed  I  saw  upon  the  bridge  that  which  haunts  our  dark¬ 
est  dreams,  I  saw  Durin’s  Bane,’  said  Gimli  in  a  low  voice, 
and  dread  was  in  his  eyes. 

‘Alas!’  said  Celeborn.  ‘We  long  have  feared  that  under 
Caradhras  a  terror  slept.  But  had  I  known  that  the  Dwarves 
had  stirred  up  this  evil  in  Moria  again,  I  would  have  forbidden 
you  to  pass  the  northern  borders,  you  and  all  that  went  with 
you.  And  if  it  were  possible,  one  would  say  that  at  the  last 
Gandalf  fell  from  wisdom  into  folly,  going  needlessly  into  the 
net  of  Moria.’ 

‘He  would  be  rash  indeed  that  said  that  thing,’  said 
Galadriel  gravely.  ‘Needless  were  none  of  the  deeds  of 
Gandalf  in  life.  Those  that  followed  him  knew  not  his  mind 
and  cannot  report  his  full  purpose.  But  however  it  may  be 
with  the  guide,  the  followers  are  blameless.  Do  not  repent 
of  your  welcome  to  the  Dwarf.  If  our  folk  had  been  exiled 
long  and  far  from  Lothlorien,  who  of  the  Galadhrim,  even 
Celeborn  the  Wise,  would  pass  nigh  and  would  not  wish  to 
look  upon  their  ancient  home,  though  it  had  become  an  abode 
of  dragons? 

‘Dark  is  the  water  of  Kheled-zaram,  and  cold  are  the 
springs  of  Kibil-nala,  and  fair  were  the  many-pillared  halls  of 
Khazad-dum  in  Elder  Days  before  the  fall  of  mighty  lungs 
beneath  the  stone.’  She  looked  upon  Gimli,  who  sat  glowering 
and  sad,  and  she  smiled.  And  the  Dwarf,  hearing  the  names 
given  in  his  own  ancient  tongue,  looked  up  and  met  her  eyes; 
and  it  seemed  to  him  that  he  looked  suddenly  into  the  heart 
of  an  enemy  and  saw  there  love  and  understanding.  Wonder 
came  into  his  face,  and  then  he  smiled  in  answer. 

He  rose  clumsily  and  bowed  in  dwarf-fashion,  saying:  ‘Y et 


464  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

more  fair  is  the  living  land  of  Lorien,  and  the  Lady  Galadriel 
is  above  all  the  jewels  that  lie  beneath  the  earth!’ 

There  was  a  silence.  At  length  Celeborn  spoke  again.  ‘I  did 
not  know  that  your  plight  was  so  evil,’  he  said.  ‘Let  Gimli 
forget  my  harsh  words:  I  spoke  in  the  trouble  of  my  heart.  I 
will  do  what  I  can  to  aid  you,  each  according  to  his  wish  and 
need,  but  especially  that  one  of  the  little  folk  who  bears  the 
burden.’ 

‘Your  quest  is  known  to  us,’  said  Galadriel,  looking  at 
Frodo.  ‘But  we  will  not  here  speak  of  it  more  openly.  Yet  not 
in  vain  will  it  prove,  maybe,  that  you  came  to  this  land  seeking 
aid,  as  Gandalf  himself  plainly  purposed.  For  the  Lord  of  the 
Galadhrim  is  accounted  the  wisest  of  the  Elves  of  Middle- 
earth,  and  a  giver  of  gifts  beyond  the  power  of  kings.  He  has 
dwelt  in  the  West  since  the  days  of  dawn,  and  I  have  dwelt 
with  him  years  uncounted;  for  ere  the  fall  of  Nargothrond  or 
Gondolin  I  passed  over  the  mountains,  and  together  through 
ages  of  the  world  we  have  fought  the  long  defeat. 

‘I  it  was  who  first  summoned  the  White  Council.  And  if 
my  designs  had  not  gone  amiss,  it  would  have  been  governed 
by  Gandalf  the  Grey,  and  then  mayhap  things  would  have 
gone  otherwise.  But  even  now  there  is  hope  left.  I  will  not 
give  you  counsel,  saying  do  this,  or  do  that.  For  not  in  doing 
or  contriving,  nor  in  choosing  between  this  course  and 
another,  can  I  avail;  but  only  in  knowing  what  was  and  is, 
and  in  part  also  what  shall  be.  But  this  I  will  say  to  you:  your 
Quest  stands  upon  the  edge  of  a  knife.  Stray  but  a  little  and 
it  will  fail,  to  the  ruin  of  all.  Yet  hope  remains  while  all  the 
Company  is  true.’ 

And  with  that  word  she  held  them  with  her  eyes,  and  in 
silence  looked  searchingly  at  each  of  them  in  turn.  None  save 
Legolas  and  Aragorn  could  long  endure  her  glance.  Sam 
quickly  blushed  and  hung  his  head. 

At  length  the  Lady  Galadriel  released  them  from  her  eyes, 
and  she  smiled.  ‘Do  not  let  your  hearts  be  troubled,’  she  said. 
‘Tonight  you  shall  sleep  in  peace.’  Then  they  sighed  and  felt 


THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL  465 

suddenly  weary,  as  those  who  have  been  questioned  long  and 
deeply,  though  no  words  had  been  spoken  openly. 

‘Go  now!’  said  Celeborn.  ‘You  are  worn  with  sorrow  and 
much  toil.  Even  if  your  Quest  did  not  concern  us  closely,  you 
should  have  refuge  in  this  City,  until  you  were  healed  and 
refreshed.  Now  you  shall  rest,  and  we  will  not  speak  of  your 
further  road  for  a  while.’ 

That  night  the  Company  slept  upon  the  ground,  much  to 
the  satisfaction  of  the  hobbits.  The  Elves  spread  for  them  a 
pavilion  among  the  trees  near  the  fountain,  and  in  it  they  laid 
soft  couches;  then  speaking  words  of  peace  with  fair  Elvish 
voices  they  left  them.  For  a  little  while  the  travellers  talked  of 
their  night  before  in  the  tree-tops,  and  of  their  day’s  journey, 
and  of  the  Lord  and  Lady;  for  they  had  not  yet  the  heart  to 
look  further  back. 

‘What  did  you  blush  for,  Sam?’  said  Pippin.  ‘You  soon 
broke  down.  Anyone  would  have  thought  you  had  a  guilty 
conscience.  I  hope  it  was  nothing  worse  than  a  wicked  plot 
to  steal  one  of  my  blankets.’ 

‘I  never  thought  no  such  thing,’  answered  Sam,  in  no  mood 
for  jest.  ‘If  you  want  to  know,  I  felt  as  if  I  hadn’t  got  nothing 
on,  and  I  didn’t  like  it.  She  seemed  to  be  looking  inside  me 
and  asking  me  what  I  would  do  if  she  gave  me  the  chance  of 
flying  back  home  to  the  Shire  to  a  nice  little  hole  with  -  with 
a  bit  of  garden  of  my  own.’ 

‘That’s  funny,’  said  Merry.  ‘Almost  exactly  what  I  felt 
myself;  only,  only  well,  I  don’t  think  I’ll  say  any  more,’  he 
ended  lamely. 

All  of  them,  it  seemed,  had  fared  alike:  each  had  felt  that 
he  was  offered  a  choice  between  a  shadow  full  of  fear  that 
lay  ahead,  and  something  that  he  greatly  desired:  clear  before 
his  mind  it  lay,  and  to  get  it  he  had  only  to  turn  aside  from 
the  road  and  leave  the  Quest  and  the  war  against  Sauron  to 
others. 

‘And  it  seemed  to  me,  too,’  said  Gimli,  ‘that  my  choice 
would  remain  secret  and  known  only  to  myself.’ 


466 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘To  me  it  seemed  exceedingly  strange,’  said  Boromir. 
‘Maybe  it  was  only  a  test,  and  she  thought  to  read  our 
thoughts  for  her  own  good  purpose;  but  almost  I  should 
have  said  that  she  was  tempting  us,  and  offering  what  she 
pretended  to  have  the  power  to  give.  It  need  not  be  said  that 
I  refused  to  listen.  The  Men  of  Minas  Tirith  are  true  to  their 
word.’  But  what  he  thought  that  the  Lady  had  offered  him 
Boromir  did  not  tell. 

And  as  for  Frodo,  he  would  not  speak,  though  Boromir 
pressed  him  with  questions.  ‘She  held  you  long  in  her  gaze, 
Ring-bearer,’  he  said. 

‘Yes,’  said  Frodo;  ‘but  whatever  came  into  my  mind  then 
I  will  keep  there.’ 

‘Well,  have  a  care!’  said  Boromir.  ‘I  do  not  feel  too  sure  of 
this  Elvish  Lady  and  her  purposes.’ 

‘Speak  no  evil  of  the  Lady  Galadriel!’  said  Aragorn  sternly. 
‘Y ou  know  not  what  you  say.  There  is  in  her  and  in  this  land 
no  evil,  unless  a  man  bring  it  hither  himself.  Then  let  him 
beware!  But  tonight  I  shall  sleep  without  fear  for  the  first  time 
since  I  left  Rivendell.  And  may  I  sleep  deep,  and  forget  for  a 
while  my  grief!  I  am  weary  in  body  and  in  heart.’  He  cast 
himself  down  upon  his  couch  and  fell  at  once  into  a  long 
sleep. 

The  others  soon  did  the  same,  and  no  sound  or  dream 
disturbed  their  slumber.  When  they  woke  they  found  that  the 
light  of  day  was  broad  upon  the  lawn  before  the  pavilion,  and 
the  fountain  rose  and  fell  glittering  in  the  sun. 

They  remained  some  days  in  Lothlorien,  so  far  as  they 
could  tell  or  remember.  All  the  while  that  they  dwelt  there 
the  sun  shone  clear,  save  for  a  gentle  rain  that  fell  at  times, 
and  passed  away  leaving  all  things  fresh  and  clean.  The  air 
was  cool  and  soft,  as  if  it  were  early  spring,  yet  they  felt  about 
them  the  deep  and  thoughtful  quiet  of  winter.  It  seemed  to 
them  that  they  did  little  but  eat  and  drink  and  rest,  and  walk 
among  the  trees;  and  it  was  enough. 

They  had  not  seen  the  Lord  and  Lady  again,  and  they  had 


THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL 


467 


little  speech  with  the  Elven-folk;  for  few  of  these  knew  or 
would  use  the  Westron  tongue.  Haldir  had  bidden  them  fare¬ 
well  and  gone  back  again  to  the  fences  of  the  North,  where 
great  watch  was  now  kept  since  the  tidings  of  Moria  that  the 
Company  had  brought.  Legolas  was  away  much  among  the 
Galadhrim,  and  after  the  first  night  he  did  not  sleep  with 
the  other  companions,  though  he  returned  to  eat  and  talk 
with  them.  Often  he  took  Gimli  with  him  when  he  went 
abroad  in  the  land,  and  the  others  wondered  at  this  change. 

Now  as  the  companions  sat  or  walked  together  they  spoke 
of  Gandalf,  and  all  that  each  had  known  and  seen  of  him 
came  clear  before  their  minds.  As  they  were  healed  of  hurt 
and  weariness  of  body  the  grief  of  their  loss  grew  more  keen. 
Often  they  heard  nearby  Elvish  voices  singing,  and  knew  that 
they  were  making  songs  of  lamentation  for  his  fall,  for  they 
caught  his  name  among  the  sweet  sad  words  that  they  could 
not  understand. 

Mithrandir ,  Mithrandir  sang  the  Elves,  O  Pilgrim  Grey!  For 
so  they  loved  to  call  him.  But  if  Legolas  was  with  the  Com¬ 
pany,  he  would  not  interpret  the  songs  for  them,  saying  that 
he  had  not  the  skill,  and  that  for  him  the  grief  was  still  too 
near,  a  matter  for  tears  and  not  yet  for  song. 

It  was  Frodo  who  first  put  something  of  his  sorrow  into 
halting  words.  He  was  seldom  moved  to  make  song  or  rhyme; 
even  in  Rivendell  he  had  listened  and  had  not  sung  himself, 
though  his  memory  was  stored  with  many  things  that  others 
had  made  before  him.  But  now  as  he  sat  beside  the  fountain 
in  Lorien  and  heard  about  him  the  voices  of  the  Elves,  his 
thought  took  shape  in  a  song  that  seemed  fair  to  him;  yet 
when  he  tried  to  repeat  it  to  Sam  only  snatches  remained, 
faded  as  a  handful  of  withered  leaves. 

When  evening  in  the  Shire  was  grey 
his  footsteps  on  the  Hill  were  heard; 
before  the  dawn  he  went  away 
on  journey  long  without  a  word. 


468 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


From  Wilderland  to  Western  shore, 
from  northern  waste  to  southern  hill, 
through  dragon-lair  and  hidden  door 
and  darkling  woods  he  walked  at  will. 

With  Dwarf  and  Hobbit,  Elves  and  Men, 
with  mortal  and  immortal  folk, 
with  bird  on  bough  and  beast  in  den, 
in  their  own  secret  tongues  he  spoke. 

A  deadly  sword,  a  healing  hand, 
a  back  that  bent  beneath  its  load; 
a  trumpet-voice,  a  burning  brand, 
a  weary  pilgrim  on  the  road. 

A  lord  of  wisdom  throned  he  sat, 
swift  in  anger,  quick  to  laugh; 
an  old  man  in  a  battered  hat 
who  leaned  upon  a  thorny  staff. 

He  stood  upon  the  bridge  alone 
and  Fire  and  Shadow  both  defied; 
his  staff  was  broken  on  the  stone, 
in  Khazad-dum  his  wisdom  died. 

‘Why,  you’ll  be  beating  Mr.  Bilbo  next!’  said  Sam. 

‘No,  I  am  afraid  not,’  said  Frodo.  ‘But  that  is  the  best  I 
can  do  yet.’ 

‘Well,  Mr.  Frodo,  if  you  do  have  another  go,  I  hope  you’ll 
say  a  word  about  his  fireworks,’  said  Sam.  ‘Something  like 
this: 


The  finest  rockets  ever  seen: 
they  burst  in  stars  of  blue  and  green, 
or  after  thunder  golden  showers 
came  falling  like  a  rain  of  flowers. 


THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL  469 

Though  that  doesn’t  do  them  justice  by  a  long  road.’ 

‘No,  I’ll  leave  that  to  you,  Sam.  Or  perhaps  to  Bilbo. 
But  -  well,  I  can’t  talk  of  it  any  more.  I  can’t  bear  to  think 
of  bringing  the  news  to  him.’ 

One  evening  Frodo  and  Sam  were  walking  together  in 
the  cool  twilight.  Both  of  them  felt  restless  again.  On  Frodo 
suddenly  the  shadow  of  parting  had  fallen:  he  knew  somehow 
that  the  time  was  very  near  when  he  must  leave  Lothlorien. 

‘What  do  you  think  of  Elves  now,  Sam?’  he  said.  ‘I  asked 
you  the  same  question  once  before  -  it  seems  a  very  long 
while  ago;  but  you  have  seen  more  of  them  since  then.’ 

‘I  have  indeed!’  said  Sam.  ‘And  I  reckon  there’s  Elves  and 
Elves.  They’re  all  Elvish  enough,  but  they’re  not  all  the  same. 
Now  these  folk  aren’t  wanderers  or  homeless,  and  seem  a  bit 
nearer  to  the  likes  of  us:  they  seem  to  belong  here,  more  even 
than  Etobbits  do  in  the  Shire.  Whether  they’ve  made  the  land, 
or  the  land’s  made  them,  it’s  hard  to  say,  if  you  take  my 
meaning.  It’s  wonderfully  quiet  here.  Nothing  seems  to  be 
going  on,  and  nobody  seems  to  want  it  to.  If  there’s  any 
magic  about,  it’s  right  down  deep,  where  I  can’t  lay  my  hands 
on  it,  in  a  manner  of  speaking.’ 

‘You  can  see  and  feel  it  everywhere,’  said  Frodo. 

‘Well,’  said  Sam,  ‘you  can’t  see  nobody  working  it.  No 
fireworks  like  poor  old  Gandalf  used  to  show.  I  wonder  we 
don’t  see  nothing  of  the  Lord  and  Lady  in  all  these  days. 
I  fancy  now  that  she  could  do  some  wonderful  things,  if 
she  had  a  mind.  I’d  dearly  love  to  see  some  Elf-magic,  Mr. 
Frodo!’ 

‘I  wouldn’t,’  said  Frodo.  ‘I  am  content.  And  I  don’t  miss 
Gandalf ’s  fireworks,  but  his  bushy  eyebrows,  and  his  quick 
temper,  and  his  voice.’ 

‘You’re  right,’  said  Sam.  ‘And  don’t  think  I’m  finding  fault. 
I’ve  often  wanted  to  see  a  bit  of  magic  like  what  it  tells  of  in 
old  tales,  but  I’ve  never  heard  of  a  better  land  than  this.  It’s 
like  being  at  home  and  on  a  holiday  at  the  same  time,  if  you 
understand  me.  I  don’t  want  to  leave.  All  the  same,  I’m 


470 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


beginning  to  feel  that  if  we’ve  got  to  go  on,  then  we’d  best 
get  it  over. 

‘ It’s  the  job  that’s  never  started  as  takes  longest  to  finish ,  as 
my  old  gaffer  used  to  say.  And  I  don’t  reckon  that  these  folk 
can  do  much  more  to  help  us,  magic  or  no.  It’s  when  we  leave 
this  land  that  we  shall  miss  Gandalf  worse,  I’m  thinking.’ 

‘I  am  afraid  that’s  only  too  true,  Sam,’  said  Frodo.  ‘Yet  I 
hope  very  much  that  before  we  leave  we  shall  see  the  Lady 
of  the  Elves  again.’ 

Even  as  he  spoke,  they  saw,  as  if  she  came  in  answer  to 
their  words,  the  Lady  Galadriel  approaching.  Tall  and  white 
and  fair  she  walked  beneath  the  trees.  She  spoke  no  word, 
but  beckoned  to  them. 

Turning  aside,  she  led  them  towards  the  southern  slopes 
of  the  hill  of  Caras  Galadhon,  and  passing  through  a  high 
green  hedge  they  came  into  an  enclosed  garden.  No  trees 
grew  there,  and  it  lay  open  to  the  sky.  The  evening  star  had 
risen  and  was  shining  with  white  fire  above  the  western 
woods.  Down  a  long  flight  of  steps  the  Lady  went  into  the 
deep  green  hollow,  through  which  ran  murmuring  the  silver 
stream  that  issued  from  the  fountain  on  the  hill.  At  the 
bottom,  upon  a  low  pedestal  carved  like  a  branching  tree, 
stood  a  basin  of  silver,  wide  and  shallow,  and  beside  it  stood 
a  silver  ewer. 

With  water  from  the  stream  Galadriel  filled  the  basin  to 
the  brim,  and  breathed  on  it,  and  when  the  water  was  still 
again  she  spoke.  ‘Here  is  the  Mirror  of  Galadriel,’  she  said. 
‘I  have  brought  you  here  so  that  you  may  look  in  it,  if  you 
will.’ 

The  air  was  very  still,  and  the  dell  was  dark,  and  the  Elf- 
lady  beside  him  was  tall  and  pale.  ‘What  shall  we  look  for, 
and  what  shall  we  see?’  asked  Frodo,  filled  with  awe. 

‘Many  things  I  can  command  the  Mirror  to  reveal,’  she 
answered,  ‘and  to  some  I  can  show  what  they  desire  to  see. 
But  the  Mirror  will  also  show  things  unbidden,  and  those  are 
often  stranger  and  more  profitable  than  things  which  we  wish 
to  behold.  What  you  will  see,  if  you  leave  the  Mirror  free  to 


THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL 


471 


work,  I  cannot  tell.  For  it  shows  things  that  were,  and  things 
that  are,  and  things  that  yet  may  be.  But  which  it  is  that  he 
sees,  even  the  wisest  cannot  always  tell.  Do  you  wish  to  look?’ 

Frodo  did  not  answer. 

‘And  you?’  she  said,  turning  to  Sam.  ‘For  this  is  what  your 
folic  would  call  magic,  I  believe;  though  I  do  not  understand 
clearly  what  they  mean;  and  they  seem  to  use  the  same  word 
of  the  deceits  of  the  Enemy.  But  this,  if  you  will,  is  the 
magic  of  Galadriel.  Did  you  not  say  that  you  wished  to  see 
Elf-magic?’ 

‘I  did,’  said  Sam,  trembling  a  little  between  fear  and  curi¬ 
osity.  ‘I’ll  have  a  peep,  Lady,  if  you’re  willing. 

‘And  Fd  not  mind  a  glimpse  of  what’s  going  on  at  home,’ 
he  said  in  an  aside  to  Frodo.  ‘It  seems  a  terrible  long  time 
that  I’ve  been  away.  But  there,  like  as  not  I’ll  only  see  the 
stars,  or  something  that  I  won’t  understand.’ 

‘Like  as  not,’  said  the  Lady  with  a  gentle  laugh.  ‘But  come, 
you  shall  look  and  see  what  you  may.  Do  not  touch  the 
water!’ 

Sam  climbed  up  on  the  foot  of  the  pedestal  and  leaned 
over  the  basin.  The  water  looked  hard  and  dark.  Stars  were 
reflected  in  it. 

‘There’s  only  stars,  as  I  thought,’  he  said.  Then  he  gave  a 
low  gasp,  for  the  stars  went  out.  As  if  a  dark  veil  had  been 
withdrawn,  the  Mirror  grew  grey,  and  then  clear.  There  was 
sun  shining,  and  the  branches  of  trees  were  waving  and  toss¬ 
ing  in  the  wind.  But  before  Sam  could  make  up  his  mind 
what  it  was  that  he  saw,  the  light  faded;  and  now  he  thought 
he  saw  Frodo  with  a  pale  face  lying  fast  asleep  under  a  great 
dark  cliff.  Then  he  seemed  to  see  himself  going  along  a  dim 
passage,  and  climbing  an  endless  winding  stair.  It  came  to 
him  suddenly  that  he  was  looking  urgently  for  something, 
but  what  it  was  he  did  not  know.  Like  a  dream  the  vision 
shifted  and  went  back,  and  he  saw  the  trees  again.  But  this 
time  they  were  not  so  close,  and  he  could  see  what  was  going 
on:  they  were  not  waving  in  the  wind,  they  were  falling, 
crashing  to  the  ground. 


472 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Hi!’  cried  Sam  in  an  outraged  voice.  ‘There’s  that  Ted 
Sandyman  a-cutting  down  trees  as  he  shouldn’t.  They  didn’t 
ought  to  be  felled:  it’s  that  avenue  beyond  the  Mill  that  shades 
the  road  to  Bywater.  I  wish  I  could  get  at  Ted,  and  I’d  fell 
himV 

But  now  Sam  noticed  that  the  Old  Mill  had  vanished,  and 
a  large  red-brick  building  was  being  put  up  where  it  had 
stood.  Lots  of  folk  were  busily  at  work.  There  was  a  tall  red 
chimney  nearby.  Black  smoke  seemed  to  cloud  the  surface  of 
the  Mirror. 

‘There’s  some  devilry  at  work  in  the  Shire,’  he  said.  ‘Elrond 
knew  what  he  was  about  when  he  wanted  to  send  Mr.  Merry 
back.’  Then  suddenly  Sam  gave  a  cry  and  sprang  away.  ‘I 
can’t  stay  here,’  he  said  wildly.  ‘I  must  go  home.  They’ve 
dug  up  Bagshot  Row,  and  there’s  the  poor  old  Gaffer  going 
down  the  Hill  with  his  bits  of  things  on  a  barrow.  I  must  go 
home!’ 

‘You  cannot  go  home  alone,’  said  the  Lady.  ‘You  did  not 
wish  to  go  home  without  your  master  before  you  looked  in 
the  Mirror,  and  yet  you  knew  that  evil  things  might  well  be 
happening  in  the  Shire.  Remember  that  the  Mirror  shows 
many  things,  and  not  all  have  yet  come  to  pass.  Some  never 
come  to  be,  unless  those  that  behold  the  visions  turn  aside 
from  their  path  to  prevent  them.  The  Mirror  is  dangerous  as 
a  guide  of  deeds.’ 

Sam  sat  on  the  ground  and  put  his  head  in  his  hands.  ‘I 
wish  I  had  never  come  here,  and  I  don’t  want  to  see  no  more 
magic,’  he  said  and  fell  silent.  After  a  moment  he  spoke  again 
thickly,  as  if  struggling  with  tears.  ‘No,  I’ll  go  home  by  the 
long  road  with  Mr.  Frodo,  or  not  at  all,’  he  said.  ‘But  I  hope 
I  do  get  back  some  day.  If  what  I’ve  seen  turns  out  true, 
somebody’s  going  to  catch  it  hot!’ 

‘Do  you  now  wish  to  look,  Frodo?’  said  the  Lady  Galadriel. 
‘You  did  not  wish  to  see  Elf-magic  and  were  content.’ 

‘Do  you  advise  me  to  look?’  asked  Frodo. 

‘No,’  she  said.  ‘I  do  not  counsel  you  one  way  or  the  other. 


THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL 


473 


I  am  not  a  counsellor.  You  may  learn  something,  and  whether 
what  you  see  be  fair  or  evil,  that  may  be  profitable,  and  yet 
it  may  not.  Seeing  is  both  good  and  perilous.  Yet  I  think, 
Frodo,  that  you  have  courage  and  wisdom  enough  for  the 
venture,  or  I  would  not  have  brought  you  here.  Do  as  you 
will!’ 

‘I  will  look,’  said  Frodo,  and  he  climbed  on  the  pedestal 
and  bent  over  the  dark  water.  At  once  the  Mirror  cleared  and 
he  saw  a  twilit  land.  Mountains  loomed  dark  in  the  distance 
against  a  pale  sky.  A  long  grey  road  wound  back  out  of  sight. 
Far  away  a  figure  came  slowly  down  the  road,  faint  and 
small  at  first,  but  growing  larger  and  clearer  as  it  approached. 
Suddenly  Frodo  realized  that  it  reminded  him  of  Gandalf. 
He  almost  called  aloud  the  wizard’s  name,  and  then  he  saw 
that  the  figure  was  clothed  not  in  grey  but  in  white,  in  a  white 
that  shone  faintly  in  the  dusk;  and  in  its  hand  there  was  a 
white  staff.  The  head  was  so  bowed  that  he  could  see  no  face, 
and  presently  the  figure  turned  aside  round  a  bend  in  the 
road  and  went  out  of  the  Mirror’s  view.  Doubt  came  into 
Frodo’s  mind:  was  this  a  vision  of  Gandalf  on  one  of  his 
many  lonely  journeys  long  ago,  or  was  it  Saruman? 

The  vision  now  changed.  Brief  and  small  but  very  vivid  he 
caught  a  glimpse  of  Bilbo  walking  restlessly  about  his  room. 
The  table  was  littered  with  disordered  papers;  rain  was  beat¬ 
ing  on  the  windows. 

Then  there  was  a  pause,  and  after  it  many  swift  scenes 
followed  that  Frodo  in  some  way  knew  to  be  parts  of  a  great 
history  in  which  he  had  become  involved.  The  mist  cleared 
and  he  saw  a  sight  which  he  had  never  seen  before  but  knew 
at  once:  the  Sea.  Darkness  fell.  The  sea  rose  and  raged  in  a 
great  storm.  Then  he  saw  against  the  Sun,  sinking  blood-red 
into  a  wrack  of  clouds,  the  black  outline  of  a  tall  ship  with 
torn  sails  riding  up  out  of  the  West.  Then  a  wide  river  flowing 
through  a  populous  city.  Then  a  white  fortress  with  seven 
towers.  And  then  again  a  ship  with  black  sails,  but  now  it  was 
morning  again,  and  the  water  rippled  with  light,  and  a  banner 
bearing  the  emblem  of  a  white  tree  shone  in  the  sun.  A  smoke 


474 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


as  of  fire  and  battle  arose,  and  again  the  sun  went  down  in  a 
burning  red  that  faded  into  a  grey  mist;  and  into  the  mist  a 
small  ship  passed  away,  twinkling  with  lights.  It  vanished, 
and  Frodo  sighed  and  prepared  to  draw  away. 

But  suddenly  the  Mirror  went  altogether  dark,  as  dark  as 
if  a  hole  had  opened  in  the  world  of  sight,  and  Frodo  looked 
into  emptiness.  In  the  black  abyss  there  appeared  a  single 
Eye  that  slowly  grew,  until  it  filled  nearly  all  the  Mirror.  So 
terrible  was  it  that  Frodo  stood  rooted,  unable  to  cry  out  or 
to  withdraw  his  gaze.  The  Eye  was  rimmed  with  fire,  but  was 
itself  glazed,  yellow  as  a  cat’s,  watchful  and  intent,  and  the 
black  slit  of  its  pupil  opened  on  a  pit,  a  window  into  nothing. 

Then  the  Eye  began  to  rove,  searching  this  way  and  that; 
and  Frodo  knew  with  certainty  and  horror  that  among  the 
many  things  that  it  sought  he  himself  was  one.  But  he  also 
knew  that  it  could  not  see  him  -  not  yet,  not  unless  he  willed 
it.  The  Ring  that  hung  upon  its  chain  about  his  neck  grew 
heavy,  heavier  than  a  great  stone,  and  his  head  was  dragged 
downwards.  The  Mirror  seemed  to  be  growing  hot  and  curls 
of  steam  were  rising  from  the  water.  He  was  slipping  forward. 

‘Do  not  touch  the  water!’  said  the  Lady  Galadriel  softly. 
The  vision  faded,  and  Frodo  found  that  he  was  looking  at 
the  cool  stars  twinkling  in  the  silver  basin.  He  stepped  back 
shaking  all  over  and  looked  at  the  Lady. 

‘I  know  what  it  was  that  you  last  saw,’  she  said;  ‘for  that  is 
also  in  my  mind.  Do  not  be  afraid!  But  do  not  think  that  only 
by  singing  amid  the  trees,  nor  even  by  the  slender  arrows 
of  elven-bows,  is  this  land  of  Lothlorien  maintained  and 
defended  against  its  Enemy.  I  say  to  you,  Frodo,  that  even 
as  I  speak  to  you,  I  perceive  the  Dark  Lord  and  know  his 
mind,  or  all  of  his  mind  that  concerns  the  Elves.  And  he 
gropes  ever  to  see  me  and  my  thought.  But  still  the  door  is 
closed!’ 

She  lifted  up  her  white  arms,  and  spread  out  her  hands 
towards  the  East  in  a  gesture  of  rejection  and  denial.  Earendil, 
the  Evening  Star,  most  beloved  of  the  Elves,  shone  clear 
above.  So  bright  was  it  that  the  figure  of  the  Elven-lady  cast 


THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL 


475 


a  dim  shadow  on  the  ground.  Its  rays  glanced  upon  a  ring 
about  her  finger;  it  glittered  like  polished  gold  overlaid  with 
silver  light,  and  a  white  stone  in  it  twinkled  as  if  the  Even- 
star  had  come  down  to  rest  upon  her  hand.  Frodo  gazed  at 
the  ring  with  awe;  for  suddenly  it  seemed  to  him  that  he 
understood. 

‘Yes,’  she  said,  divining  his  thought,  ‘it  is  not  permitted  to 
speak  of  it,  and  Elrond  could  not  do  so.  But  it  cannot  be 
hidden  from  the  Ring-bearer,  and  one  who  has  seen  the  Eye. 
Verily  it  is  in  the  land  of  Lorien  upon  the  finger  of  Galadriel 
that  one  of  the  Three  remains.  This  is  Nenya,  the  Ring  of 
Adamant,  and  I  am  its  keeper. 

‘He  suspects,  but  he  does  not  know  -  not  yet.  Do  you  not 
see  now  wherefore  your  coming  is  to  us  as  the  footstep  of 
Doom?  For  if  you  fail,  then  we  are  laid  bare  to  the  Enemy. 
Yet  if  you  succeed,  then  our  power  is  diminished,  and 
Lothlorien  will  fade,  and  the  tides  of  Time  will  sweep  it  away. 
We  must  depart  into  the  West,  or  dwindle  to  a  rustic  folk  of 
dell  and  cave,  slowly  to  forget  and  to  be  forgotten.’ 

Frodo  bent  his  head.  ‘And  what  do  you  wish?’  he  said  at 
last. 

‘That  what  should  be  shall  be,’  she  answered.  ‘The  love  of 
the  Elves  for  their  land  and  their  works  is  deeper  than  the 
deeps  of  the  Sea,  and  their  regret  is  undying  and  cannot  ever 
wholly  be  assuaged.  Yet  they  will  cast  all  away  rather  than 
submit  to  Sauron:  for  they  know  him  now.  For  the  fate  of 
Lothlorien  you  are  not  answerable,  but  only  for  the  doing  of 
your  own  task.  Yet  I  could  wish,  were  it  of  any  avail,  that  the 
One  Ring  had  never  been  wrought,  or  had  remained  for  ever 
lost.’ 

‘You  are  wise  and  fearless  and  fair,  Lady  Galadriel,’  said 
Frodo.  ‘I  will  give  you  the  One  Ring,  if  you  ask  for  it.  It  is 
too  great  a  matter  for  me.’ 

Galadriel  laughed  with  a  sudden  clear  laugh.  ‘Wise  the 
Lady  Galadriel  may  be,’  she  said,  ‘yet  here  she  has  met  her 
match  in  courtesy.  Gently  are  you  revenged  for  my  testing 
of  your  heart  at  our  first  meeting.  You  begin  to  see  with  a 


476 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


keen  eye.  I  do  not  deny  that  my  heart  has  greatly  desired  to 
ask  what  you  offer.  For  many  long  years  I  had  pondered  what 
I  might  do,  should  the  Great  Ring  come  into  my  hands,  and 
behold!  it  was  brought  within  my  grasp.  The  evil  that  was 
devised  long  ago  works  on  in  many  ways,  whether  Sauron 
himself  stands  or  falls.  Would  not  that  have  been  a  noble 
deed  to  set  to  the  credit  of  his  Ring,  if  I  had  taken  it  by  force 
or  fear  from  my  guest? 

‘And  now  at  last  it  comes.  You  will  give  me  the  Ring  freely! 
In  place  of  the  Dark  Lord  you  will  set  up  a  Queen.  And  I 
shall  not  be  dark,  but  beautiful  and  terrible  as  the  Morning 
and  the  Night!  Fair  as  the  Sea  and  the  Sun  and  the  Snow 
upon  the  Mountain!  Dreadful  as  the  Storm  and  the  Light¬ 
ning!  Stronger  than  the  foundations  of  the  earth.  All  shall 
love  me  and  despair!’ 

She  lifted  up  her  hand  and  from  the  ring  that  she  wore 
there  issued  a  great  light  that  illumined  her  alone  and  left  all 
else  dark.  She  stood  before  Frodo  seeming  now  tall  beyond 
measurement,  and  beautiful  beyond  enduring,  terrible  and 
worshipful.  Then  she  let  her  hand  fall,  and  the  light  faded, 
and  suddenly  she  laughed  again,  and  lo!  she  was  shrunken:  a 
slender  elf-woman,  clad  in  simple  white,  whose  gentle  voice 
was  soft  and  sad. 

‘I  pass  the  test,’  she  said.  ‘I  will  diminish,  and  go  into  the 
West,  and  remain  Galadriel.’ 

They  stood  for  a  long  while  in  silence.  At  length  the  Lady 
spoke  again.  ‘Let  us  return!’  she  said.  ‘In  the  morning  you 
must  depart,  for  now  we  have  chosen,  and  the  tides  of  fate 
are  flowing.’ 

‘I  would  ask  one  thing  before  we  go,’  said  Frodo,  ‘a  thing 
which  I  often  meant  to  ask  Gandalf  in  Rivendell.  I  am  per¬ 
mitted  to  wear  the  One  Ring:  why  cannot  /  see  all  the  others 
and  know  the  thoughts  of  those  that  wear  them?’ 

‘You  have  not  tried,’  she  said.  ‘Only  thrice  have  you  set 
the  Ring  upon  your  finger  since  you  knew  what  you  pos¬ 
sessed.  Do  not  try!  It  would  destroy  you.  Did  not  Gandalf 


THE  MIRROR  OF  GALADRIEL 


Ml 


tell  you  that  the  rings  give  power  according  to  the  measure 
of  each  possessor?  Before  you  could  use  that  power  you 
would  need  to  become  far  stronger,  and  to  train  your  will  to 
the  domination  of  others.  Yet  even  so,  as  Ring-bearer  and  as 
one  that  has  borne  it  on  finger  and  seen  that  which  is  hidden, 
your  sight  is  grown  keener.  You  have  perceived  my  thought 
more  clearly  than  many  that  are  accounted  wise.  You  saw 
the  Eye  of  him  that  holds  the  Seven  and  the  Nine.  And  did 
you  not  see  and  recognize  the  ring  upon  my  finger?  Did  you 
see  my  ring?’  she  asked  turning  again  to  Sam. 

‘No,  Lady,’  he  answered.  ‘To  tell  you  the  truth,  I  wondered 
what  you  were  talking  about.  I  saw  a  star  through  your 
fingers.  But  if  you’ll  pardon  my  speaking  out,  I  think  my 
master  was  right.  I  wish  you’d  take  his  Ring.  You’d  put  things 
to  rights.  You’d  stop  them  digging  up  the  Gaffer  and  turning 
him  adrift.  You’d  make  some  folic  pay  for  their  dirty  work.’ 

‘I  would,’  she  said.  ‘That  is  how  it  would  begin.  But  it 
would  not  stop  with  that,  alas!  We  will  not  speak  more  of  it. 
Let  us  go!’ 


Chapter  8 


FAREWELL  TO  LORIEN 


That  night  the  Company  was  again  summoned  to  the 
chamber  of  Celeborn,  and  there  the  Lord  and  Lady  greeted 
them  with  fair  words.  At  length  Celeborn  spoke  of  their 
departure. 

‘Now  is  the  time,’  he  said,  ‘when  those  who  wish  to  con¬ 
tinue  the  Quest  must  harden  their  hearts  to  leave  this  land. 
Those  who  no  longer  wish  to  go  forward  may  remain  here, 
for  a  while.  But  whether  they  stay  or  go,  none  can  be  sure  of 
peace.  For  we  are  come  now  to  the  edge  of  doom.  Here  those 
who  wish  may  await  the  oncoming  of  the  hour  till  either  the 
ways  of  the  world  lie  open  again,  or  we  summon  them  to  the 
last  need  of  Lorien.  Then  they  may  return  to  their  own  lands, 
or  else  go  to  the  long  home  of  those  that  fall  in  battle.’ 

There  was  a  silence.  ‘They  all  resolved  to  go  forward,’  said 
Galadriel  looking  in  their  eyes. 

‘As  for  me,’  said  Boromir,  ‘my  way  home  lies  onward  and 
not  back.’ 

‘That  is  true,’  said  Celeborn,  ‘but  is  all  this  Company  going 
with  you  to  Minas  Tirith?’ 

‘We  have  not  decided  our  course,’  said  Aragorn.  ‘Beyond 
Lothlorien  I  do  not  know  what  Gandalf  intended  to  do. 
Indeed  I  do  not  think  that  even  he  had  any  clear  purpose.’ 

‘Maybe  not,’  said  Celeborn,  ‘yet  when  you  leave  this  land, 
you  can  no  longer  forget  the  Great  River.  As  some  of  you 
know  well,  it  cannot  be  crossed  by  travellers  with  baggage 
between  Lorien  and  Gondor,  save  by  boat.  And  are  not  the 
bridges  of  Osgiliath  broken  down  and  all  the  landings  held 
now  by  the  Enemy? 

‘On  which  side  will  you  journey?  The  way  to  Minas  Tirith 
lies  upon  this  side,  upon  the  west;  but  the  straight  road  of  the 


FAREWELL  TO  LORIEN  479 

Quest  lies  east  of  the  River,  upon  the  darker  shore.  Which 
shore  will  you  now  take?’ 

‘If  my  advice  is  heeded,  it  will  be  the  western  shore,  and 
the  way  to  Minas  Tirith,’  answered  Boromir.  ‘But  I  am  not 
the  leader  of  the  Company.’  The  others  said  nothing,  and 
Aragorn  looked  doubtful  and  troubled. 

‘I  see  that  you  do  not  yet  know  what  to  do,’  said  Celeborn. 
‘It  is  not  my  part  to  choose  for  you;  but  I  will  help  you  as  I 
may.  There  are  some  among  you  who  can  handle  boats: 
Legolas,  whose  folk  know  the  swift  Forest  River;  and  Boromir 
of  Gondor;  and  Aragorn  the  traveller.’ 

‘And  one  Hobbit!’  cried  Merry.  ‘Not  all  of  us  look  on 
boats  as  wild  horses.  My  people  live  by  the  banks  of  the 
Brandywine.’ 

‘That  is  well,’  said  Celeborn.  ‘Then  I  will  furnish  your 
Company  with  boats.  They  must  be  small  and  light,  for  if 
you  go  far  by  water,  there  are  places  where  you  will  be  forced 
to  carry  them.  You  will  come  to  the  rapids  of  Sarn  Gebir, 
and  maybe  at  last  to  the  great  falls  of  Rauros  where  the  River 
thunders  down  from  Nen  Hithoel;  and  there  are  other  perils. 
Boats  may  make  your  journey  less  toilsome  for  a  while.  Yet 
they  will  not  give  you  counsel:  in  the  end  you  must  leave 
them  and  the  River,  and  turn  west  -  or  east.’ 

Aragorn  thanked  Celeborn  many  times.  The  gift  of  boats 
comforted  him  much,  not  least  because  there  would  now  be 
no  need  to  decide  his  course  for  some  days.  The  others,  too, 
looked  more  hopeful.  Whatever  perils  lay  ahead,  it  seemed 
better  to  float  down  the  broad  tide  of  Anduin  to  meet  them 
than  to  plod  forward  with  bent  backs.  Only  Sam  was  doubt¬ 
ful:  he  at  any  rate  still  thought  boats  as  bad  as  wild  horses, 
or  worse,  and  not  all  the  dangers  that  he  had  survived  made 
him  think  better  of  them. 

‘All  shall  be  prepared  for  you  and  await  you  at  the  haven 
before  noon  tomorrow,’  said  Celeborn.  ‘I  will  send  my  people 
to  you  in  the  morning  to  help  you  make  ready  for  the  journey. 
Now  we  will  wish  you  all  a  fair  night  and  untroubled  sleep.’ 

‘Good  night,  my  friends!’  said  Galadriel.  ‘Sleep  in  peace! 


480  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

Do  not  trouble  your  hearts  overmuch  with  thought  of  the 
road  tonight.  Maybe  the  paths  that  you  each  shall  tread  are 
already  laid  before  your  feet,  though  you  do  not  see  them. 
Good  night!’ 

The  Company  now  took  their  leave  and  returned  to  their 
pavilion.  Legolas  went  with  them,  for  this  was  to  be  their  last 
night  in  Lothlorien,  and  in  spite  of  the  words  of  Galadriel 
they  wished  to  take  counsel  together. 

For  a  long  time  they  debated  what  they  should  do,  and 
how  it  would  be  best  to  attempt  the  fulfilling  of  their  purpose 
with  the  Ring;  but  they  came  to  no  decision.  It  was  plain  that 
most  of  them  desired  to  go  first  to  Minas  Tirith,  and  to  escape 
at  least  for  a  while  from  the  terror  of  the  Enemy.  They  would 
have  been  willing  to  follow  a  leader  over  the  River  and 
into  the  shadow  of  Mordor;  but  Frodo  spoke  no  word,  and 
Aragorn  was  still  divided  in  his  mind. 

His  own  plan,  while  Gandalf  remained  with  them,  had 
been  to  go  with  Boromir,  and  with  his  sword  help  to  deliver 
Gondor.  For  he  believed  that  the  message  of  the  dreams  was 
a  summons,  and  that  the  hour  had  come  at  last  when  the  heir 
of  Elendil  should  come  forth  and  strive  with  Sauron  for  the 
mastery.  But  in  Moria  the  burden  of  Gandalf  had  been  laid 
on  him;  and  he  knew  that  he  could  not  now  forsake  the  Ring, 
if  Frodo  refused  in  the  end  to  go  with  Boromir.  And  yet  what 
help  could  he  or  any  of  the  Company  give  to  Frodo,  save  to 
walk  blindly  with  him  into  the  darkness? 

‘I  shall  go  to  Minas  Tirith,  alone  if  need  be,  for  it  is  my 
duty,’  said  Boromir;  and  after  that  he  was  silent  for  a  while, 
sitting  with  his  eyes  fixed  on  Frodo,  as  if  he  was  trying  to 
read  the  Halfling’s  thoughts.  At  length  he  spoke  again,  softly, 
as  if  he  was  debating  with  himself.  ‘If  you  wish  only  to  destroy 
the  Ring,’  he  said,  ‘then  there  is  little  use  in  war  and  weapons; 
and  the  Men  of  Minas  Tirith  cannot  help.  But  if  you  wish  to 
destroy  the  armed  might  of  the  Dark  Lord,  then  it  is  folly  to 
go  without  force  into  his  domain;  and  folly  to  throw  away.’ 
He  paused  suddenly,  as  if  he  had  become  aware  that  he  was 


FAREWELL  TO  LORIEN 


481 


speaking  his  thoughts  aloud.  ‘It  would  be  folly  to  throw  lives 
away,  I  mean,’  he  ended.  ‘It  is  a  choice  between  defending  a 
strong  place  and  walking  openly  into  the  arms  of  death.  At 
least,  that  is  how  I  see  it.’ 

Frodo  caught  something  new  and  strange  in  Boromir’s 
glance,  and  he  looked  hard  at  him.  Plainly  Boromir’s  thought 
was  different  from  his  final  words.  It  would  be  folly  to  throw 
away:  what?  The  Ring  of  Power?  He  had  said  something  like 
this  at  the  Council,  but  then  he  had  accepted  the  correction 
of  Elrond.  Frodo  looked  at  Aragorn,  but  he  seemed  deep 
in  his  own  thought  and  made  no  sign  that  he  had  heeded 
Boromir’s  words.  And  so  their  debate  ended.  Merry  and 
Pippin  were  already  asleep,  and  Sam  was  nodding.  The  night 
was  growing  old. 

In  the  morning,  as  they  were  beginning  to  pack  their  slen¬ 
der  goods,  Elves  that  could  speak  their  tongue  came  to  them 
and  brought  them  many  gifts  of  food  and  clothing  for  the 
journey.  The  food  was  mostly  in  the  form  of  very  thin  cakes, 
made  of  a  meal  that  was  baked  a  light  brown  on  the  outside, 
and  inside  was  the  colour  of  cream.  Gimli  took  up  one  of  the 
cakes  and  looked  at  it  with  a  doubtful  eye. 

‘ Cram ,’  he  said  under  his  breath,  as  he  broke  off  a  crisp 
corner  and  nibbled  at  it.  His  expression  quickly  changed,  and 
he  ate  all  the  rest  of  the  cake  with  relish. 

‘No  more,  no  more!’  cried  the  Elves  laughing.  ‘You  have 
eaten  enough  already  for  a  long  day’s  march.’ 

‘I  thought  it  was  only  a  kind  of  cram,  such  as  the  Dale-men 
make  for  journeys  in  the  wild,’  said  the  Dwarf. 

‘So  it  is,’  they  answered.  ‘But  we  call  it  lembas  or  waybread, 
and  it  is  more  strengthening  than  any  food  made  by  Men, 
and  it  is  more  pleasant  than  cram,  by  all  accounts.’ 

‘Indeed  it  is,’  said  Gimli.  ‘Why,  it  is  better  than  the  honey- 
cakes  of  the  Beornings,  and  that  is  great  praise,  for  the 
Beornings  are  the  best  bakers  that  I  know  of;  but  they  are 
none  too  willing  to  deal  out  their  cakes  to  travellers  in  these 
days.  You  are  kindly  hosts!’ 


482  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

‘All  the  same,  we  bid  you  spare  the  food,’  they  said.  ‘Eat 
little  at  a  time,  and  only  at  need.  For  these  things  are  given 
to  serve  you  when  all  else  fails.  The  cakes  will  keep  sweet 
for  many  many  days,  if  they  are  unbroken  and  left  in  their 
leaf-wrappings,  as  we  have  brought  them.  One  will  keep  a 
traveller  on  his  feet  for  a  day  of  long  labour,  even  if  he  be 
one  of  the  tall  Men  of  Minas  Tirith.’ 

The  Elves  next  unwrapped  and  gave  to  each  of  the  Com¬ 
pany  the  clothes  they  had  brought.  For  each  they  had  pro¬ 
vided  a  hood  and  cloak,  made  according  to  his  size,  of  the 
light  but  warm  silken  stuff  that  the  Galadhrim  wove.  It  was 
hard  to  say  of  what  colour  they  were:  grey  with  the  hue  of 
twilight  under  the  trees  they  seemed  to  be;  and  yet  if  they 
were  moved,  or  set  in  another  light,  they  were  green  as 
shadowed  leaves,  or  brown  as  fallow  fields  by  night,  dusk- 
silver  as  water  under  the  stars.  Each  cloak  was  fastened  about 
the  neck  with  a  brooch  like  a  green  leaf  veined  with  silver. 

‘Are  these  magic  cloaks?’  asked  Pippin,  looking  at  them 
with  wonder. 

‘I  do  not  know  what  you  mean  by  that,’  answered  the 
leader  of  the  Elves.  ‘They  are  fair  garments,  and  the  web  is 
good,  for  it  was  made  in  this  land.  They  are  Elvish  robes 
certainly,  if  that  is  what  you  mean.  Leaf  and  branch,  water 
and  stone:  they  have  the  hue  and  beauty  of  all  these  things 
under  the  twilight  of  Lorien  that  we  love;  for  we  put  the 
thought  of  all  that  we  love  into  all  that  we  make.  Yet  they  are 
garments,  not  armour,  and  they  will  not  turn  shaft  or  blade. 
But  they  should  serve  you  well:  they  are  light  to  wear,  and 
warm  enough  or  cool  enough  at  need.  And  you  will  find  them 
a  great  aid  in  keeping  out  of  the  sight  of  unfriendly  eyes, 
whether  you  walk  among  the  stones  or  the  trees.  You  are 
indeed  high  in  the  favour  of  the  Lady!  For  she  herself  and 
her  maidens  wove  this  stuff;  and  never  before  have  we  clad 
strangers  in  the  garb  of  our  own  people.’ 

After  their  morning  meal  the  Company  said  farewell  to  the 
lawn  by  the  fountain.  Their  hearts  were  heavy;  for  it  was  a 


FAREWELL  TO  LORIEN 


483 


fair  place,  and  it  had  become  like  home  to  them,  though  they 
could  not  count  the  days  and  nights  that  they  had  passed 
there.  As  they  stood  for  a  moment  looking  at  the  white  water 
in  the  sunlight,  Haldir  came  walking  towards  them  over  the 
green  grass  of  the  glade.  Frodo  greeted  him  with  delight. 

‘I  have  returned  from  the  Northern  Fences,’  said  the  Elf, 
‘and  I  am  sent  now  to  be  your  guide  again.  The  Dimrill  Dale 
is  full  of  vapour  and  clouds  of  smoke,  and  the  mountains  are 
troubled.  There  are  noises  in  the  deeps  of  the  earth.  If  any 
of  you  had  thought  of  returning  northwards  to  your  homes, 
you  would  not  have  been  able  to  pass  that  way.  But  come! 
Your  path  now  goes  south.’ 

As  they  walked  through  Caras  Galadhon  the  green  ways 
were  empty;  but  in  the  trees  above  them  many  voices  were 
murmuring  and  singing.  They  themselves  went  silently.  At 
last  Haldir  led  them  down  the  southward  slopes  of  the  hill, 
and  they  came  again  to  the  great  gate  hung  with  lamps,  and 
to  the  white  bridge;  and  so  they  passed  out  and  left  the  city 
of  the  Elves.  Then  they  turned  away  from  the  paved  road 
and  took  a  path  that  went  off  into  a  deep  thicket  of  mallorn- 
trees,  and  passed  on,  winding  through  rolling  woodlands  of 
silver  shadow,  leading  them  ever  down,  southwards  and  east¬ 
wards,  towards  the  shores  of  the  River. 

They  had  gone  some  ten  miles  and  noon  was  at  hand 
when  they  came  on  a  high  green  wall.  Passing  through  an 
opening  they  came  suddenly  out  of  the  trees.  Before  them 
lay  a  long  lawn  of  shining  grass,  studded  with  golden  elanor 
that  glinted  in  the  sun.  The  lawn  ran  out  into  a  narrow  tongue 
between  bright  margins:  on  the  right  and  west  the  Silverlode 
flowed  glittering;  on  the  left  and  east  the  Great  River  rolled 
its  broad  waters,  deep  and  dark.  On  the  further  shores  the 
woodlands  still  marched  on  southwards  as  far  as  eye  could 
see,  but  all  the  banks  were  bleak  and  bare.  No  mallorn  lifted 
its  gold-hung  boughs  beyond  the  Land  of  Lorien. 

On  the  hank  of  the  Silverlode,  at  some  distance  up  from 
the  meeting  of  the  streams,  there  was  a  hythe  of  white  stones 
and  white  wood.  By  it  were  moored  many  boats  and  barges. 


484  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

Some  were  brightly  painted,  and  shone  with  silver  and  gold 
and  green,  but  most  were  either  white  or  grey.  Three  small 
grey  boats  had  been  made  ready  for  the  travellers,  and  in 
these  the  Elves  stowed  their  goods.  And  they  added  also  coils 
of  rope,  three  to  each  boat.  Slender  they  looked,  but  strong, 
silken  to  the  touch,  grey  of  hue  like  the  elven-cloaks. 

‘What  are  these?’  asked  Sam,  handling  one  that  lay  upon 
the  greensward. 

‘Ropes  indeed!’  answered  an  Elf  from  the  boats.  ‘Never 
travel  far  without  a  rope!  And  one  that  is  long  and  strong  and 
light.  Such  are  these.  They  may  be  a  help  in  many  needs.’ 

‘You  don’t  need  to  tell  me  that!’  said  Sam.  ‘I  came  without 
any,  and  I’ve  been  worried  ever  since.  But  I  was  wondering 
what  these  were  made  of,  knowing  a  bit  about  rope-making: 
it’s  in  the  family  as  you  might  say.’ 

‘They  are  made  of  hithlain,’  said  the  Elf,  ‘but  there  is  no 
time  now  to  instruct  you  in  the  art  of  their  making.  Had  we 
known  that  this  craft  delighted  you,  we  could  have  taught 
you  much.  But  now  alas!  unless  you  should  at  some  time 
return  hither,  you  must  be  content  with  our  gift.  May  it  serve 
you  well!’ 

‘Come!’  said  Haldir.  ‘All  is  now  ready  for  you.  Enter  the 
boats!  But  take  care  at  first!’ 

‘Heed  the  words!’  said  the  other  Elves.  ‘These  boats  are 
light-built,  and  they  are  crafty  and  unlike  the  boats  of  other 
folic.  They  will  not  sink,  lade  them  as  you  will;  but  they  are 
wayward  if  mishandled.  It  would  be  wise  if  you  accustomed 
yourselves  to  stepping  in  and  out,  here  where  there  is  a 
landing-place,  before  you  set  off  downstream.’ 

The  Company  was  arranged  in  this  way:  Aragorn,  Frodo, 
and  Sam  were  in  one  boat;  Boromir,  Merry,  and  Pippin  in 
another;  and  in  the  third  were  Legolas  and  Gimli,  who  had 
now  become  fast  friends.  In  this  last  boat  most  of  the  goods 
and  packs  were  stowed.  The  boats  were  moved  and  steered 
with  short-handled  paddles  that  had  broad  leaf-shaped 
blades.  When  all  was  ready  Aragorn  led  them  on  a  trial  up 


FAREWELL  TO  LORIEN 


485 


the  Silverlode.  The  current  was  swift  and  they  went  forward 
slowly.  Sam  sat  in  the  bows,  clutching  the  sides,  and  looking 
back  wistfully  to  the  shore.  The  sunlight  glittering  on  the 
water  dazzled  his  eyes.  As  they  passed  beyond  the  green  field 
of  the  Tongue,  the  trees  drew  down  to  the  river’s  brink.  Here 
and  there  golden  leaves  tossed  and  floated  on  the  rippling 
stream.  The  air  was  very  bright  and  still,  and  there  was  a 
silence,  except  for  the  high  distant  song  of  larks. 

They  turned  a  sharp  bend  in  the  river,  and  there,  sailing 
proudly  down  the  stream  towards  them,  they  saw  a  swan  of 
great  size.  The  water  rippled  on  either  side  of  the  white  breast 
beneath  its  curving  neck.  Its  beak  shone  like  burnished  gold, 
and  its  eyes  glinted  like  jet  set  in  yellow  stones;  its  huge  white 
wings  were  half  lifted.  A  music  came  down  the  river  as  it 
drew  nearer;  and  suddenly  they  perceived  that  it  was  a  ship, 
wrought  and  carved  with  elven-skill  in  the  likeness  of  a  bird. 
Two  elves  clad  in  white  steered  it  with  black  paddles.  In 
the  midst  of  the  vessel  sat  Celeborn,  and  behind  him  stood 
Galadriel,  tall  and  white;  a  circlet  of  golden  flowers  was  in 
her  hair,  and  in  her  hand  she  held  a  harp,  and  she  sang.  Sad 
and  sweet  was  the  sound  of  her  voice  in  the  cool  clear  air: 

I  sang  of  leaves,  of  leaves  of  gold,  and  leaves  of  gold  there 
grew: 

Of  wind  I  sang,  a  wind  there  came  and  in  the  branches  blew. 

Beyond  the  Sim,  beyond  the  Moon,  the  foam  was  on  the  Sea, 

And  by  the  strand  ofllmarin  there  grew  a  golden  Tree. 

Beneath  the  stars  of  Ever- eve  in  Eldamar  it  shone, 

In  Eldamar  beside  the  walls  of  Elven  Tirion. 

There  long  the  golden  leaves  have  grown  upon  the  branching 
years. 

While  here  beyond  the  Sundering  Seas  now  fall  the  Elven- 
tears. 

O  Lorien!  The  Winter  comes,  the  bare  and  leafless  Day; 

The  leaves  are  falling  in  the  stream,  the  River  flows  away. 

O  Lorien!  Too  long  I  have  dwelt  upon  this  Hither  Shore 

And  in  a  fading  crown  have  twined  the  golden  elanor. 


486 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


But  if  of  ships  I  now  should  sing,  what  ship  would  come  to 
me, 

What  ship  would  bear  me  ever  back  across  so  wide  a  Sea? 

Aragorn  stayed  his  boat  as  the  Swan-ship  drew  alongside. 
The  Lady  ended  her  song  and  greeted  them.  ‘We  have  come 
to  bid  our  last  farewell,’  she  said,  ‘and  to  speed  you  with 
blessings  from  our  land.’ 

‘Though  you  have  been  our  guests,’  said  Celeborn,  ‘you 
have  not  yet  eaten  with  us,  and  we  bid  you,  therefore,  to  a 
parting  feast,  here  between  the  flowing  waters  that  will  bear 
you  far  from  Lorien.’ 

The  Swan  passed  on  slowly  to  the  hythe,  and  they  turned 
their  boats  and  followed  it.  There  in  the  last  end  of  Egladil 
upon  the  green  grass  the  parting  feast  was  held;  but  Frodo 
ate  and  drank  little,  heeding  only  the  beauty  of  the  Lady  and 
her  voice.  She  seemed  no  longer  perilous  or  terrible,  nor  filled 
with  hidden  power.  Already  she  seemed  to  him,  as  by  men 
of  later  days  Elves  still  at  times  are  seen:  present  and  yet 
remote,  a  living  vision  of  that  which  has  already  been  left  far 
behind  by  the  flowing  streams  of  Time. 

After  they  had  eaten  and  drunk,  sitting  upon  the  grass, 
Celeborn  spoke  to  them  again  of  their  journey,  and  lifting  his 
hand  he  pointed  south  to  the  woods  beyond  the  Tongue. 

‘As  you  go  down  the  water,’  he  said,  ‘you  will  find  that  the 
trees  will  fail,  and  you  will  come  to  a  barren  country.  There 
the  River  flows  in  stony  vales  amid  high  moors,  until  at  last 
after  many  leagues  it  comes  to  the  tall  island  of  the  Tindrock, 
that  we  call  Tol  Brandir.  There  it  casts  its  arms  about  the 
steep  shores  of  the  isle,  and  falls  then  with  a  great  noise  and 
smoke  over  the  cataracts  of  Rauros  down  into  the  Nindalf, 
the  Wetwang  as  it  is  called  in  your  tongue.  That  is  a  wide 
region  of  sluggish  fen  where  the  stream  becomes  tortuous 
and  much  divided.  There  the  Entwash  flows  in  by  many 
mouths  from  the  Forest  of  Fangorn  in  the  west.  About  that 
stream,  on  this  side  of  the  Great  River,  lies  Rohan.  On  the 


FAREWELL  TO  LORIEN 


487 


further  side  are  the  bleak  hills  of  the  Emyn  Muil.  The  wind 
blows  from  the  East  there,  for  they  look  out  over  the  Dead 
Marshes  and  the  Noman-lands  to  Cirith  Gorgor  and  the 
black  gates  of  Mordor. 

‘Boromir,  and  any  that  go  with  him  seeking  Minas  Tirith, 
will  do  well  to  leave  the  Great  River  above  Rauros  and  cross 
the  Entwash  before  it  finds  the  marshes.  Yet  they  should  not 
go  too  far  up  that  stream,  nor  risk  becoming  entangled  in  the 
Forest  of  Fangorn.  That  is  a  strange  land,  and  is  now  little 
known.  But  Boromir  and  Aragorn  doubtless  do  not  need  this 
warning.’ 

‘Indeed  we  have  heard  of  Fangorn  in  Minas  Tirith,’  said 
Boromir.  ‘But  what  I  have  heard  seems  to  me  for  the  most 
part  old  wives’  tales,  such  as  we  tell  to  our  children.  All  that 
lies  north  of  Rohan  is  now  to  us  so  far  away  that  fancy  can 
wander  freely  there.  Of  old  Fangorn  lay  upon  the  borders  of 
our  realm;  but  it  is  now  many  lives  of  men  since  any  of  us 
visited  it,  to  prove  or  disprove  the  legends  that  have  come 
down  from  distant  years. 

‘I  have  myself  been  at  whiles  in  Rohan,  but  I  have  never 
crossed  it  northwards.  When  I  was  sent  out  as  a  messenger, 
I  passed  through  the  Gap  by  the  skirts  of  the  White  Moun¬ 
tains,  and  crossed  the  Isen  and  the  Greyflood  into  Norther- 
land.  A  long  and  wearisome  journey.  Four  hundred  leagues 
I  reckoned  it,  and  it  took  me  many  months;  for  I  lost  my 
horse  at  Tharbad,  at  the  fording  of  the  Greyflood.  After  that 
journey,  and  the  road  I  have  trodden  with  this  Company,  I 
do  not  much  doubt  that  I  shall  find  a  way  through  Rohan, 
and  Fangorn  too,  if  need  be.’ 

‘Then  I  need  say  no  more,’  said  Celeborn.  ‘But  do  not 
despise  the  lore  that  has  come  down  from  distant  years;  for 
oft  it  may  chance  that  old  wives  keep  in  memory  word  of 
things  that  once  were  needful  for  the  wise  to  know.’ 

Now  Galadriel  rose  from  the  grass,  and  taking  a  cup  from 
one  of  her  maidens  she  filled  it  with  white  mead  and  gave  it 
to  Celeborn. 


488 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘Now  it  is  time  to  drink  the  cup  of  farewell,’  she  said. 
‘Drink,  Lord  of  the  Galadhrim!  And  let  not  your  heart  be 
sad,  though  night  must  follow  noon,  and  already  our  evening 
draweth  nigh.’ 

Then  she  brought  the  cup  to  each  of  the  Company,  and 
bade  them  drink  and  farewell.  But  when  they  had  drunk  she 
commanded  them  to  sit  again  on  the  grass,  and  chairs  were 
set  for  her  and  for  Celeborn.  Her  maidens  stood  silent  about 
her,  and  a  while  she  looked  upon  her  guests.  At  last  she  spoke 
again. 

‘We  have  drunk  the  cup  of  parting,’  she  said,  ‘and  the 
shadows  fall  between  us.  But  before  you  go,  I  have  brought 
in  my  ship  gifts  which  the  Lord  and  Lady  of  the  Galadhrim 
now  offer  you  in  memory  of  Lothlorien.’  Then  she  called  to 
each  in  turn. 

‘Here  is  the  gift  of  Celeborn  and  Galadriel  to  the  leader  of 
your  Company,’  she  said  to  Aragorn,  and  she  gave  him  a 
sheath  that  had  been  made  to  fit  his  sword.  It  was  overlaid 
with  a  tracery  of  flowers  and  leaves  wrought  of  silver  and 
gold,  and  on  it  were  set  in  elven-runes  formed  of  many  gems 
the  name  Anduril  and  the  lineage  of  the  sword. 

‘The  blade  that  is  drawn  from  this  sheath  shall  not  be 
stained  or  broken  even  in  defeat,’  she  said.  ‘But  is  there  aught 
else  that  you  desire  of  me  at  our  parting?  For  darkness  will 
flow  between  us,  and  it  may  be  that  we  shall  not  meet  again, 
unless  it  be  far  hence  upon  a  road  that  has  no  returning.’ 

And  Aragorn  answered:  ‘Lady,  you  know  all  my  desire, 
and  long  held  in  keeping  the  only  treasure  that  I  seek.  Yet  it 
is  not  yours  to  give  me,  even  if  you  would;  and  only  through 
darkness  shall  I  come  to  it.’ 

‘Yet  maybe  this  will  lighten  your  heart,’  said  Galadriel;  ‘for 
it  was  left  in  my  care  to  be  given  to  you,  should  you  pass 
through  this  land.’  Then  she  lifted  from  her  lap  a  great  stone 
of  a  clear  green,  set  in  a  silver  brooch  that  was  wrought  in 
the  likeness  of  an  eagle  with  outspread  wings;  and  as  she  held 
it  up  the  gem  flashed  like  the  sun  shining  through  the  leaves 
of  spring.  ‘This  stone  I  gave  to  Celebrian  my  daughter,  and 


FAREWELL  TO  LORIEN 


489 


she  to  hers;  and  now  it  comes  to  you  as  a  token  of  hope.  In 
this  hour  take  the  name  that  was  foretold  for  you,  Elessar, 
the  Elfstone  of  the  House  of  Elendil!’ 

Then  Aragorn  took  the  stone  and  pinned  the  brooch  upon 
his  breast,  and  those  who  saw  him  wondered;  for  they  had 
not  marked  before  how  tall  and  kingly  he  stood,  and  it  seemed 
to  them  that  many  years  of  toil  had  fallen  from  his  shoulders. 
‘For  the  gifts  that  you  have  given  me  I  thank  you,’  he  said, 
‘O  Lady  of  Lorien  of  whom  were  sprung  Celebrian  and 
Arwen  Evenstar.  What  praise  could  I  say  more?’ 

The  Lady  bowed  her  head,  and  she  turned  then  to  Boro- 
mir,  and  to  him  she  gave  a  belt  of  gold;  and  to  Merry  and 
Pippin  she  gave  small  silver  belts,  each  with  a  clasp  wrought 
like  a  golden  flower.  To  Legolas  she  gave  a  bow  such  as 
the  Galadhrim  used,  longer  and  stouter  than  the  bows  of 
Mirkwood,  and  strung  with  a  string  of  elf-hair.  With  it  went 
a  quiver  of  arrows. 

‘For  you  little  gardener  and  lover  of  trees,’  she  said  to  Sam, 
‘I  have  only  a  small  gift.’  She  put  into  his  hand  a  little  box  of 
plain  grey  wood,  unadorned  save  for  a  single  silver  rune  upon 
the  lid.  ‘Here  is  set  G  for  Galadriel,’  she  said;  ‘but  also  it  may 
stand  for  garden  in  your  tongue.  In  this  box  there  is  earth 
from  my  orchard,  and  such  blessing  as  Galadriel  has  still  to 
bestow  is  upon  it.  It  will  not  keep  you  on  your  road,  nor 
defend  you  against  any  peril;  but  if  you  keep  it  and  see  your 
home  again  at  last,  then  perhaps  it  may  reward  you.  Though 
you  should  find  all  barren  and  laid  waste,  there  will  be  few 
gardens  in  Middle-earth  that  will  bloom  like  your  garden, 
if  you  sprinkle  this  earth  there.  Then  you  may  remember 
Galadriel,  and  catch  a  glimpse  far  off  of  Lorien,  that  you 
have  seen  only  in  our  winter.  For  our  Spring  and  our  Summer 
are  gone  by,  and  they  will  never  be  seen  on  earth  again  save 
in  memory.’ 

Sam  went  red  to  the  ears  and  muttered  something  inaud¬ 
ible,  as  he  clutched  the  box  and  bowed  as  well  as  he  could. 

‘And  what  gift  would  a  Dwarf  ask  of  the  Elves?’  said 
Galadriel,  turning  to  Gimli. 


490 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘None,  Lady,’  answered  Gimli.  ‘It  is  enough  for  me  to  have 
seen  the  Lady  of  the  Galadhrim,  and  to  have  heard  her  gentle 
words.’ 

‘Hear  all  ye  Elves!’  she  cried  to  those  about  her.  ‘Let  none 
say  again  that  Dwarves  are  grasping  and  ungracious!  Yet 
surely,  Gimli  son  of  Gloin,  you  desire  something  that  I  could 
give?  Name  it,  I  bid  you!  You  shall  not  be  the  only  guest 
without  a  gift.’ 

‘There  is  nothing,  Lady  Galadriel,’  said  Gimli,  bowing  low 
and  stammering.  ‘Nothing,  unless  it  might  be  -  unless  it  is 
permitted  to  ask,  nay,  to  name  a  single  strand  of  your  hair, 
which  surpasses  the  gold  of  the  earth  as  the  stars  surpass  the 
gems  of  the  mine.  I  do  not  ask  for  such  a  gift.  But  you 
commanded  me  to  name  my  desire.’ 

The  Elves  stirred  and  murmured  with  astonishment,  and 
Celeborn  gazed  at  the  Dwarf  in  wonder,  but  the  Lady  smiled. 
‘It  is  said  that  the  skill  of  the  Dwarves  is  in  their  hands  rather 
than  in  their  tongues,’  she  said;  ‘yet  that  is  not  true  of  Gimli. 
For  none  have  ever  made  to  me  a  request  so  bold  and  yet  so 
courteous.  And  how  shall  I  refuse,  since  I  commanded  him 
to  speak?  But  tell  me,  what  would  you  do  with  such  a  gift?’ 

‘Treasure  it,  Lady,’  he  answered,  ‘in  memory  of  your 
words  to  me  at  our  first  meeting.  And  if  ever  I  return  to  the 
smithies  of  my  home,  it  shall  be  set  in  imperishable  crystal 
to  be  an  heirloom  of  my  house,  and  a  pledge  of  good  will 
between  the  Mountain  and  the  Wood  until  the  end  of 
days.’ 

Then  the  Lady  unbraided  one  of  her  long  tresses,  and  cut 
off  three  golden  hairs,  and  laid  them  in  Gimli’s  hand.  ‘These 
words  shall  go  with  the  gift,’  she  said.  ‘I  do  not  foretell,  for 
all  foretelling  is  now  vain:  on  the  one  hand  lies  darkness,  and 
on  the  other  only  hope.  But  if  hope  should  not  fail,  then  I 
say  to  you,  Gimli  son  of  Gloin,  that  your  hands  shall  flow 
with  gold,  and  yet  over  you  gold  shall  have  no  dominion. 

‘And  you,  Ring-bearer,’  she  said,  turning  to  Frodo.  ‘I  come 
to  you  last  who  are  not  last  in  my  thoughts.  For  you  I  have 
prepared  this.’  She  held  up  a  small  crystal  phial:  it  glittered 


FAREWELL  TO  LORIEN 


491 


as  she  moved  it,  and  rays  of  white  light  sprang  from  her  hand. 
‘In  this  phial,’  she  said,  ‘is  caught  the  light  of  Earendil’s  star, 
set  amid  the  waters  of  my  fountain.  It  will  shine  still  brighter 
when  night  is  about  you.  May  it  be  a  light  to  you  in  dark 
places,  when  all  other  lights  go  out.  Remember  Galadriel  and 
her  Mirror!’ 

Frodo  took  the  phial,  and  for  a  moment  as  it  shone  between 
them,  he  saw  her  again  standing  like  a  queen,  great  and 
beautiful,  but  no  longer  terrible.  He  bowed,  but  found  no 
words  to  say. 

Now  the  Lady  arose,  and  Celeborn  led  them  back  to  the 
hythe.  A  yellow  noon  lay  on  the  green  land  of  the  Tongue, 
and  the  water  glittered  with  silver.  All  at  last  was  made  ready. 
The  Company  took  their  places  in  the  boats  as  before.  Crying 
farewell,  the  Elves  of  Lorien  with  long  grey  poles  thrust  them 
out  into  the  flowing  stream,  and  the  rippling  waters  bore 
them  slowly  away.  The  travellers  sat  still  without  moving  or 
speaking.  On  the  green  hank  near  to  the  very  point  of  the 
Tongue  the  Lady  Galadriel  stood  alone  and  silent.  As  they 
passed  her  they  turned  and  their  eyes  watched  her  slowly 
floating  away  from  them.  For  so  it  seemed  to  them:  Lorien 
was  slipping  backward,  like  a  bright  ship  masted  with 
enchanted  trees,  sailing  on  to  forgotten  shores,  while  they  sat 
helpless  upon  the  margin  of  the  grey  and  leafless  world. 

Even  as  they  gazed,  the  Silverlode  passed  out  into  the 
currents  of  the  Great  River,  and  their  boats  turned  and  began 
to  speed  southward.  Soon  the  white  form  of  the  Lady  was 
small  and  distant.  She  shone  like  a  window  of  glass  upon  a 
far  hill  in  the  westering  sun,  or  as  a  remote  lake  seen  from  a 
mountain:  a  crystal  fallen  in  the  lap  of  the  land.  Then  it 
seemed  to  Frodo  that  she  lifted  her  arms  in  a  final  farewell, 
and  far  but  piercing-clear  on  the  following  wind  came  the 
sound  of  her  voice  singing.  But  now  she  sang  in  the  ancient 
tongue  of  the  Elves  beyond  the  Sea,  and  he  did  not  under¬ 
stand  the  words:  fair  was  the  music,  but  it  did  not  comfort 
him. 


492 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


Yet  as  is  the  way  of  Elvish  words,  they  remained  graven  in 
his  memory,  and  long  afterwards  he  interpreted  them,  as  well 
as  he  could:  the  language  was  that  of  Elven-song  and  spoke 
of  things  little  known  on  Middle-earth. 

Ai!  laurie  lantar  lassi  surinen, 
yeni  unotime  ve  ramar  aldaron! 

Yeni  ve  linte  yuldar  avanier 
mi  oromardi  lisse-miruvoreva 
Andurie  pella,  Vardo  tellumar 
nil  luini  yassen  tintilar  i  eleni 
omaryo  airetdri-lirinen. 

Si  man  iyulma  nin  enquantuva? 

An  si  Tintalle  Varda  Oiolosseo 
ve  fanyar  maryat  Elentdri  ortane, 
ar  ilye  tier  undulave  lumbule; 
ar  sindanoriello  caita  mornie 
i  falmalinnar  imbe  met,  ar  hisie 
untupa  Calaciryo  miri  oiale. 

Si  vanwa  na,  Romello  vanwa,  Valimar! 

Namarie!  Nai  hiruvalye  Valimar. 

Nai  elye  hiruva.  Namarie! 

‘Ah!  like  gold  fall  the  leaves  in  the  wind,  long  years  number¬ 
less  as  the  wings  of  trees!  The  years  have  passed  like  swift 
draughts  of  the  sweet  mead  in  lofty  halls  beyond  the  West, 
beneath  the  blue  vaults  of  Varda  wherein  the  stars  tremble 
in  the  song  of  her  voice,  holy  and  queenly.  Who  now  shall 
refill  the  cup  for  me?  For  now  the  Kindler,  Varda,  the  Queen 
of  the  Stars,  from  Mount  Everwhite  has  uplifted  her  hands 
like  clouds,  and  all  paths  are  drowned  deep  in  shadow;  and 
out  of  a  grey  country  darkness  lies  on  the  foaming  waves 
between  us,  and  mist  covers  the  jewels  of  Calacirya  for  ever. 
Now  lost,  lost  to  those  from  the  East  is  Valimar!  Farewell! 


FAREWELL  TO  LORIEN 


493 


Maybe  thou  shalt  find  Valimar.  Maybe  even  thou  shalt  find 
it.  Farewell!’  Varda  is  the  name  of  that  Lady  whom  the  Elves 
in  these  lands  of  exile  name  Elbereth. 

Suddenly  the  River  swept  round  a  bend,  and  the  banks 
rose  upon  either  side,  and  the  light  of  Lorien  was  hidden.  To 
that  fair  land  Frodo  never  came  again. 

The  travellers  now  turned  their  faces  to  the  journey;  the 
sun  was  before  them,  and  their  eyes  were  dazzled,  for  all  were 
filled  with  tears.  Gimli  wept  openly. 

‘I  have  looked  the  last  upon  that  which  was  fairest,’  he  said 
to  Legolas  his  companion.  ‘Henceforward  I  will  call  nothing 
fair,  unless  it  be  her  gift.’  He  put  his  hand  to  his  breast. 

‘Tell  me,  Legolas,  why  did  I  come  on  this  Quest?  Little 
did  I  know  where  the  chief  peril  lay!  Truly  Elrond  spoke, 
saying  that  we  could  not  foresee  what  we  might  meet  upon 
our  road.  Torment  in  the  dark  was  the  danger  that  I  feared, 
and  it  did  not  hold  me  back.  But  I  would  not  have  come,  had 
I  known  the  danger  of  light  and  joy.  Now  I  have  taken  my 
worst  wound  in  this  parting,  even  if  I  were  to  go  this  night 
straight  to  the  Dark  Lord.  Alas  for  Gimli  son  of  Gloin!’ 

‘Nay!’  said  Legolas.  ‘Alas  for  us  all!  And  for  all  that  walk 
the  world  in  these  after-days.  For  such  is  the  way  of  it:  to 
find  and  lose,  as  it  seems  to  those  whose  boat  is  on  the 
running  stream.  But  I  count  you  blessed,  Gimli  son  of  Gloin: 
for  your  loss  you  suffer  of  your  own  free  will,  and  you  might 
have  chosen  otherwise.  But  you  have  not  forsaken  your  com¬ 
panions,  and  the  least  reward  that  you  shall  have  is  that  the 
memory  of  Lothlorien  shall  remain  ever  clear  and  unstained 
in  your  heart,  and  shall  neither  fade  nor  grow  stale.’ 

‘Maybe,’  said  Gimli;  ‘and  I  thank  you  for  your  words.  True 
words  doubtless;  yet  all  such  comfort  is  cold.  Memory  is  not 
what  the  heart  desires.  That  is  only  a  mirror,  be  it  clear  as 
Kheled-zaram.  Or  so  says  the  heart  of  Gimli  the  Dwarf.  Elves 
may  see  things  otherwise.  Indeed  I  have  heard  that  for  them 
memory  is  more  like  to  the  waking  world  than  to  a  dream. 
Not  so  for  Dwarves. 


494 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


‘But  let  us  talk  no  more  of  it.  Look  to  the  boat!  She  is  too 
low  in  the  water  with  all  this  baggage,  and  the  Great  River  is 
swift.  I  do  not  wish  to  drown  my  grief  in  cold  water.’  He  took 
up  a  paddle,  and  steered  towards  the  western  bank,  following 
Aragorn’s  boat  ahead,  which  had  already  moved  out  of  the 
middle  stream. 

So  the  Company  went  on  their  long  way,  down  the  wide 
hurrying  waters,  borne  ever  southwards.  Bare  woods  stalked 
along  either  bank,  and  they  could  not  see  any  glimpse  of  the 
lands  behind.  The  breeze  died  away  and  the  River  flowed 
without  a  sound.  No  voice  of  bird  broke  the  silence.  The  sun 
grew  misty  as  the  day  grew  old,  until  it  gleamed  in  a  pale  sky 
like  a  high  white  pearl.  Then  it  faded  into  the  West,  and  dusk 
came  early,  followed  by  a  grey  and  starless  night.  Far  into 
the  dark  quiet  hours  they  floated  on,  guiding  their  boats  under 
the  overhanging  shadows  of  the  western  woods.  Great  trees 
passed  by  like  ghosts,  thrusting  their  twisted  thirsty  roots 
through  the  mist  down  into  the  water.  It  was  dreary  and  cold. 
Frodo  sat  and  listened  to  the  faint  lap  and  gurgle  of  the  River 
fretting  among  the  tree-roots  and  driftwood  near  the  shore, 
until  his  head  nodded  and  he  fell  into  an  uneasy  sleep. 


Chapter  9 


THE  GREAT  RIVER 


Frodo  was  roused  by  Sam.  He  found  that  he  was  lying,  well 
wrapped,  under  tall  grey-skinned  trees  in  a  quiet  corner  of 
the  woodlands  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Great  River,  Anduin. 
He  had  slept  the  night  away,  and  the  grey  of  morning  was 
dim  among  the  bare  branches.  Gimli  was  busy  with  a  small 
fire  near  at  hand. 

They  started  again  before  the  day  was  broad.  Not  that 
most  of  the  Company  were  eager  to  hurry  southwards:  they 
were  content  that  the  decision,  which  they  must  make  at  latest 
when  they  came  to  Rauros  and  the  Tindrock  Isle,  still  lay 
some  days  ahead;  and  they  let  the  River  bear  them  on  at  its 
own  pace,  having  no  desire  to  hasten  towards  the  perils  that 
lay  beyond,  whichever  course  they  took  in  the  end.  Aragorn 
let  them  drift  with  the  stream  as  they  wished,  husbanding 
their  strength  against  weariness  to  come.  But  he  insisted  that 
at  least  they  should  start  early  each  day  and  journey  on  far 
into  the  evening;  for  he  felt  in  his  heart  that  time  was  pressing, 
and  he  feared  that  the  Dark  Lord  had  not  been  idle  while 
they  lingered  in  Lorien. 

Nonetheless  they  saw  no  sign  of  any  enemy  that  day,  nor 
the  next.  The  dull  grey  hours  passed  without  event.  As  the 
third  day  of  their  voyage  wore  on  the  lands  changed  slowly: 
the  trees  thinned  and  then  failed  altogether.  On  the  eastern 
bank  to  their  left  they  saw  long  formless  slopes  stretching  up 
and  away  towards  the  sky;  brown  and  withered  they  looked, 
as  if  fire  had  passed  over  them,  leaving  no  living  blade  of 
green:  an  unfriendly  waste  without  even  a  broken  tree  or  a 
bold  stone  to  relieve  the  emptiness.  They  had  come  to  the 
Brown  Lands  that  lay,  vast  and  desolate,  between  Southern 
Mirkwood  and  the  hills  of  the  Emyn  Muil.  What  pestilence 


496 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


or  war  or  evil  deed  of  the  Enemy  had  so  blasted  all  that  region 
even  Aragorn  could  not  tell. 

Upon  the  west  to  their  right  the  land  was  treeless  also,  but 
it  was  flat,  and  in  many  places  green  with  wide  plains  of 
grass.  On  this  side  of  the  River  they  passed  forests  of  great 
reeds,  so  tall  that  they  shut  out  all  view  to  the  west,  as  the 
little  boats  went  rustling  by  along  their  fluttering  borders. 
Their  dark  withered  plumes  bent  and  tossed  in  the  light  cold 
airs,  hissing  softly  and  sadly.  Here  and  there  through  open¬ 
ings  Frodo  could  catch  sudden  glimpses  of  rolling  meads, 
and  far  beyond  them  hills  in  the  sunset,  and  away  on  the 
edge  of  sight  a  dark  line,  where  marched  the  southernmost 
ranks  of  the  Misty  Mountains. 

There  was  no  sign  of  living  moving  things,  save  birds.  Of 
these  there  were  many:  small  fowl  whistling  and  piping  in  the 
reeds,  but  they  were  seldom  seen.  Once  or  twice  the  travellers 
heard  the  rush  and  whine  of  swan-wings,  and  looking  up  they 
saw  a  great  phalanx  streaming  along  the  sky. 

‘Swans!’  said  Sam.  ‘And  mighty  big  ones  too!’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Aragorn,  ‘and  they  are  black  swans.’ 

‘How  wide  and  empty  and  mournful  all  this  country  looks!’ 
said  Frodo.  ‘I  always  imagined  that  as  one  journeyed  south 
it  got  warmer  and  merrier,  until  winter  was  left  behind  for 
ever.’ 

‘But  we  have  not  journeyed  far  south  yet,’  answered 
Aragorn.  ‘It  is  still  winter,  and  we  are  far  from  the  sea.  Here 
the  world  is  cold  until  the  sudden  spring,  and  we  may  yet 
have  snow  again.  Far  away  down  in  the  Bay  of  Belfalas,  to 
which  Anduin  runs,  it  is  warm  and  merry,  maybe,  or  would 
be  but  for  the  Enemy.  But  here  we  are  not  above  sixty  leagues, 
I  guess,  south  of  the  Southfarthing  away  in  your  Shire,  hun¬ 
dreds  of  long  miles  yonder.  You  are  looking  now  south-west 
across  the  north  plains  of  the  Riddermark,  Rohan  the  land  of 
the  Horse-lords.  Ere  long  we  shall  come  to  the  mouth  of  the 
Limlight  that  runs  down  from  Fangorn  to  join  the  Great 
River.  That  is  the  north  boundary  of  Rohan;  and  of  old  all 
that  lay  between  Limlight  and  the  White  Mountains  belonged 


THE  GREAT  RIVER 


497 


to  the  Rohirrim.  It  is  a  rich  and  pleasant  land,  and  its  grass 
has  no  rival;  but  in  these  evil  days  folk  do  not  dwell  by  the 
River  or  ride  often  to  its  shores.  Anduin  is  wide,  yet  the  ores 
can  shoot  their  arrows  far  across  the  stream;  and  of  late,  it  is 
said,  they  have  dared  to  cross  the  water  and  raid  the  herds 
and  studs  of  Rohan.’ 

Sam  looked  from  bank  to  bank  uneasily.  The  trees  had 
seemed  hostile  before,  as  if  they  harboured  secret  eyes  and 
lurking  dangers;  now  he  wished  that  the  trees  were  still  there. 
He  felt  that  the  Company  was  too  naked,  afloat  in  little  open 
boats  in  the  midst  of  shelterless  lands,  and  on  a  river  that  was 
the  frontier  of  war. 

In  the  next  day  or  two,  as  they  went  on,  borne  steadily 
southwards,  this  feeling  of  insecurity  grew  on  all  the  Com¬ 
pany.  For  a  whole  day  they  took  to  their  paddles  and  hastened 
forward.  The  banks  slid  by.  Soon  the  River  broadened  and 
grew  more  shallow;  long  stony  beaches  lay  upon  the  east,  and 
there  were  gravel-shoals  in  the  water,  so  that  careful  steering 
was  needed.  The  Brown  Lands  rose  into  bleak  wolds,  over 
which  flowed  a  chill  air  from  the  East.  On  the  other  side  the 
meads  had  become  rolling  downs  of  withered  grass  amidst  a 
land  of  fen  and  tussock.  Frodo  shivered,  thinking  of  the  lawns 
and  fountains,  the  clear  sun  and  gentle  rains  of  Lothlorien. 
There  was  little  speech  and  no  laughter  in  any  of  the  boats. 
Each  member  of  the  Company  was  busy  with  his  own 
thoughts. 

The  heart  of  Legolas  was  running  under  the  stars  of  a 
summer  night  in  some  northern  glade  amid  the  beech-woods; 
Gimli  was  fingering  gold  in  his  mind,  and  wondering  if  it 
were  fit  to  be  wrought  into  the  housing  of  the  Lady’s  gift. 
Merry  and  Pippin  in  the  middle  boat  were  ill  at  ease,  for 
Boromir  sat  muttering  to  himself,  sometimes  biting  his  nails, 
as  if  some  restlessness  or  doubt  consumed  him,  sometimes 
seizing  a  paddle  and  driving  the  boat  close  behind  Aragorn’s. 
Then  Pippin,  who  sat  in  the  bow  looking  back,  caught  a 
queer  gleam  in  his  eye,  as  he  peered  forward  gazing  at  Frodo. 
Sam  had  long  ago  made  up  his  mind  that,  though  boats  were 


498 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


maybe  not  as  dangerous  as  he  had  been  brought  up  to  believe, 
they  were  far  more  uncomfortable  than  even  he  had  imag¬ 
ined.  He  was  cramped  and  miserable,  having  nothing  to  do 
but  stare  at  the  winter-lands  crawling  by  and  the  grey  water 
on  either  side  of  him.  Even  when  the  paddles  were  in  use 
they  did  not  trust  Sam  with  one. 

As  dusk  drew  down  on  the  fourth  day,  he  was  looking 
back  over  the  bowed  heads  of  Frodo  and  Aragorn  and  the 
following  boats;  he  was  drowsy  and  longed  for  camp  and  the 
feel  of  earth  under  his  toes.  Suddenly  something  caught  his 
sight:  at  first  he  stared  at  it  listlessly,  then  he  sat  up  and 
rubbed  his  eyes;  but  when  he  looked  again  he  could  not  see 
it  any  more. 

That  night  they  camped  on  a  small  eyot  close  to  the  western 
bank.  Sam  lay  rolled  in  blankets  beside  Frodo.  ‘I  had  a  funny 
dream  an  hour  or  two  before  we  stopped,  Mr.  Frodo,’  he 
said.  ‘Or  maybe  it  wasn’t  a  dream.  Funny  it  was  anyway.’ 

‘Well,  what  was  it?’  said  Frodo,  knowing  that  Sam  would 
not  settle  down  until  he  had  told  his  tale,  whatever  it  was.  ‘I 
haven’t  seen  or  thought  of  anything  to  make  me  smile  since 
we  left  Lothlorien.’ 

‘It  wasn’t  funny  that  way,  Mr.  Frodo.  It  was  queer.  All 
wrong,  if  it  wasn’t  a  dream.  And  you  had  best  hear  it.  It  was 
like  this:  I  saw  a  log  with  eyes!’ 

‘The  log’s  all  right,’  said  Frodo.  ‘There  are  many  in  the 
River.  But  leave  out  the  eyes!’ 

‘That  I  won’t,’  said  Sam.  "Twas  the  eyes  as  made  me  sit 
up,  so  to  speak.  I  saw  what  I  took  to  be  a  log  floating  along 
in  the  half-light  behind  Gimli’s  boat;  but  I  didn’t  give  much 
heed  to  it.  Then  it  seemed  as  if  the  log  was  slowly  catching 
us  up.  And  that  was  peculiar,  as  you  might  say,  seeing  as  we 
were  all  floating  on  the  stream  together.  Just  then  I  saw  the 
eyes:  two  pale  sort  of  points,  shiny-like,  on  a  hump  at  the 
near  end  of  the  log.  What’s  more,  it  wasn’t  a  log,  for  it  had 
paddle-feet,  like  a  swan’s  almost,  only  they  seemed  bigger, 
and  kept  dipping  in  and  out  of  the  water. 


THE  GREAT  RIVER 


499 


‘That’s  when  I  sat  right  up  and  rubbed  my  eyes,  meaning 
to  give  a  shout,  if  it  was  still  there  when  I  had  rubbed  the 
drowse  out  of  my  head.  For  the  whatever-it-was  was  coming 
along  fast  now  and  getting  close  behind  Gimli.  But  whether 
those  two  lamps  spotted  me  moving  and  staring,  or  whether 
I  came  to  my  senses,  I  don’t  know.  When  I  looked  again,  it 
wasn’t  there.  Yet  I  think  I  caught  a  glimpse,  with  the  tail  of 
my  eye,  as  the  saying  is,  of  something  dark  shooting  under 
the  shadow  of  the  bank.  I  couldn’t  see  no  more  eyes,  though. 

‘I  said  to  myself:  “dreaming  again,  Sam  Gamgee,”  I  said; 
and  I  said  no  more  just  then.  But  I’ve  been  thinking  since, 
and  now  I’m  not  so  sure.  What  do  you  make  of  it,  Mr. 
Frodo?’ 

‘I  should  make  nothing  of  it  but  a  log  and  the  dusk  and 
sleep  in  your  eyes,  Sam,’  said  Frodo,  ‘if  this  was  the  first  time 
that  those  eyes  had  been  seen.  But  it  isn’t.  I  saw  them  away 
back  north  before  we  reached  Lorien.  And  I  saw  a  strange 
creature  with  eyes  climbing  to  the  flet  that  night.  Haldir  saw 
it  too.  And  do  you  remember  the  report  of  the  Elves  that 
went  after  the  ore-band?’ 

‘Ah,’  said  Sam,  ‘I  do;  and  I  remember  more  too.  I  don’t 
like  my  thoughts;  but  thinking  of  one  thing  and  another,  and 
Mr.  Bilbo’s  stories  and  all,  I  fancy  I  could  put  a  name  on  the 
creature,  at  a  guess.  A  nasty  name.  Gollum,  maybe?’ 

‘Yes,  that  is  what  I  have  feared  for  some  time,’  said  Frodo. 
‘Ever  since  the  night  on  the  flet.  I  suppose  he  was  lurking  in 
Moria,  and  picked  up  our  trail  then;  but  I  hoped  that  our 
stay  in  Lorien  would  throw  him  off  the  scent  again.  The 
miserable  creature  must  have  been  hiding  in  the  woods  by 
the  Silverlode,  watching  us  start  off!’ 

‘That’s  about  it,’  said  Sam.  ‘And  we’d  better  be  a  bit  more 
watchful  ourselves,  or  we’ll  feel  some  nasty  fingers  round  our 
necks  one  of  these  nights,  if  we  ever  wake  up  to  feel  anything. 
And  that’s  what  I  was  leading  up  to.  No  need  to  trouble 
Strider  or  the  others  tonight.  I’ll  keep  watch.  I  can  sleep 
tomorrow,  being  no  more  than  luggage  in  a  boat,  as  you 
might  say.’ 


500  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

‘I  might,’  said  Frodo,  ‘and  I  might  say  “luggage  with  eyes”. 
You  shall  watch;  but  only  if  you  promise  to  wake  me  half-way 
towards  morning,  if  nothing  happens  before  then.’ 

In  the  dead  hours  Frodo  came  out  of  a  deep  dark  sleep  to 
find  Sam  shaking  him.  ‘It’s  a  shame  to  wake  you,’  whispered 
Sam,  ‘but  that’s  what  you  said.  There’s  nothing  to  tell,  or  not 
much.  I  thought  I  heard  some  soft  plashing  and  a  sniffing 
noise,  a  while  back;  but  you  hear  a  lot  of  such  queer  sounds 
by  a  river  at  night.’ 

He  lay  down,  and  Frodo  sat  up,  huddled  in  his  blankets, 
and  fought  off  his  sleep.  Minutes  or  hours  passed  slowly,  and 
nothing  happened.  Frodo  was  just  yielding  to  the  temptation 
to  lie  down  again  when  a  dark  shape,  hardly  visible,  floated 
close  to  one  of  the  moored  boats.  A  long  whitish  hand  could 
be  dimly  seen  as  it  shot  out  and  grabbed  the  gunwale;  two 
pale  lamplike  eyes  shone  coldly  as  they  peered  inside,  and 
then  they  lifted  and  gazed  up  at  Frodo  on  the  eyot.  They 
were  not  more  than  a  yard  or  two  away,  and  Frodo  heard  the 
soft  hiss  of  intaken  breath.  He  stood  up,  drawing  Sting  from 
its  sheath,  and  faced  the  eyes.  Immediately  their  light  was 
shut  off.  There  was  another  hiss  and  a  splash,  and  the  dark 
log-shape  shot  away  downstream  into  the  night.  Aragorn 
stirred  in  his  sleep,  turned  over,  and  sat  up. 

‘What  is  it?’  he  whispered,  springing  up  and  coming  to 
Frodo.  ‘I  felt  something  in  my  sleep.  Why  have  you  drawn 
your  sword?’ 

‘Gollum,’  answered  Frodo.  ‘Or  at  least,  so  I  guess.’ 

‘Ah!’  said  Aragorn.  ‘So  you  know  about  our  little  footpad, 
do  you?  He  padded  after  us  all  through  Moria  and  right  down 
to  Nimrodel.  Since  we  took  to  boats,  he  has  been  lying  on  a 
log  and  paddling  with  hands  and  feet.  I  have  tried  to  catch 
him  once  or  twice  at  night;  but  he  is  slier  than  a  fox,  and  as 
slippery  as  a  fish.  I  hoped  the  river-voyage  would  beat  him, 
but  he  is  too  clever  a  waterman. 

We  shall  have  to  try  going  faster  tomorrow.  You  lie  down 
now,  and  I  will  keep  watch  for  what  is  left  of  the  night.  I  wish 


THE  GREAT  RIVER 


501 


I  could  lay  my  hands  on  the  wretch.  We  might  make  him 
useful.  But  if  I  cannot,  we  shall  have  to  try  and  lose  him.  He 
is  very  dangerous.  Quite  apart  from  murder  by  night  on  his 
own  account,  he  may  put  any  enemy  that  is  about  on  our 
track.’ 

The  night  passed  without  Gollum  showing  so  much  as  a 
shadow  again.  After  that  the  Company  kept  a  sharp  look-out, 
but  they  saw  no  more  of  Gollum  while  the  voyage  lasted.  If 
he  was  still  following,  he  was  very  wary  and  cunning.  At 
Aragorn’s  bidding  they  paddled  now  for  long  spells,  and  the 
banks  went  swiftly  by.  But  they  saw  little  of  the  country,  for 
they  journeyed  mostly  by  night  and  twilight,  resting  by  day, 
and  lying  as  hidden  as  the  land  allowed.  In  this  way  the  time 
passed  without  event  until  the  seventh  day. 

The  weather  was  still  grey  and  overcast,  with  wind  from  the 
East,  but  as  evening  drew  into  night  the  sky  away  westward 
cleared,  and  pools  of  faint  light,  yellow  and  pale  green, 
opened  under  the  grey  shores  of  cloud.  There  the  white  rind 
of  the  new  Moon  could  be  seen  glimmering  in  the  remote 
lakes.  Sam  looked  at  it  and  puckered  his  brows. 

The  next  day  the  country  on  either  side  began  to  change 
rapidly.  The  banks  began  to  rise  and  grow  stony.  Soon  they 
were  passing  through  a  hilly  rocky  land,  and  on  both  shores 
there  were  steep  slopes  buried  in  deep  brakes  of  thorn  and 
sloe,  tangled  with  brambles  and  creepers.  Behind  them  stood 
low  crumbling  cliffs,  and  chimneys  of  grey  weathered  stone 
dark  with  ivy;  and  beyond  these  again  there  rose  high  ridges 
crowned  with  wind-writhen  firs.  They  were  drawing  near  to 
the  grey  hill-country  of  the  Emyn  Muil,  the  southern  march 
of  Wilderland. 

There  were  many  birds  about  the  cliffs  and  the  rock- 
chimneys,  and  all  day  high  in  the  air  flocks  of  birds  had  been 
circling,  black  against  the  pale  sky.  As  they  lay  in  their  camp 
that  day  Aragorn  watched  the  flights  doubtfully,  wondering 
if  Gollum  had  been  doing  some  mischief  and  the  news  of 
their  voyage  was  now  moving  in  the  wilderness.  Later  as  the 


502 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


sun  was  setting,  and  the  Company  was  stirring  and  getting 
ready  to  start  again,  he  descried  a  dark  spot  against  the  fading 
light:  a  great  bird  high  and  far  off,  now  wheeling,  now  flying 
on  slowly  southwards. 

‘What  is  that,  Legolas?’  he  asked,  pointing  to  the  northern 
sky.  ‘Is  it,  as  I  think,  an  eagle?’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Legolas.  ‘It  is  an  eagle,  a  hunting  eagle.  I  wonder 
what  that  forebodes.  It  is  far  from  the  mountains.’ 

‘We  will  not  start  until  it  is  fully  dark,’  said  Aragorn. 

The  eighth  night  of  their  journey  came.  It  was  silent  and 
windless;  the  grey  east  wind  had  passed  away.  The  thin  cres¬ 
cent  of  the  Moon  had  fallen  early  into  the  pale  sunset,  but 
the  sky  was  clear  above,  and  though  far  away  in  the  South 
there  were  great  ranges  of  cloud  that  still  shone  faintly,  in  the 
West  stars  glinted  bright. 

‘Come!’  said  Aragorn.  ‘We  will  venture  one  more  journey 
by  night.  We  are  coming  to  reaches  of  the  River  that  I  do  not 
know  well;  for  I  have  never  journeyed  by  water  in  these  parts 
before,  not  between  here  and  the  rapids  of  Sarn  Gebir.  But 
if  I  am  right  in  my  reckoning,  those  are  still  many  miles 
ahead.  Still  there  are  dangerous  places  even  before  we  come 
there:  rocks  and  stony  eyots  in  the  stream.  We  must  keep  a 
sharp  watch  and  not  try  to  paddle  swiftly.’ 

To  Sam  in  the  leading  boat  was  given  the  task  of  watch¬ 
man.  He  lay  forward  peering  into  the  gloom.  The  night  grew 
dark,  but  the  stars  above  were  strangely  bright,  and  there  was 
a  glimmer  on  the  face  of  the  River.  It  was  close  on  midnight, 
and  they  had  been  drifting  for  some  while,  hardly  using  the 
paddles,  when  suddenly  Sam  cried  out.  Only  a  few  yards 
ahead  dark  shapes  loomed  up  in  the  stream  and  he  heard  the 
swirl  of  racing  water.  There  was  a  swift  current  which  swung 
left,  towards  the  eastern  shore  where  the  channel  was  clear. 
As  they  were  swept  aside  the  travellers  could  see,  now  very 
close,  the  pale  foam  of  the  River  lashing  against  sharp  rocks 
that  were  thrust  out  far  into  the  stream  like  a  ridge  of  teeth. 
The  boats  were  all  huddled  together. 


THE  GREAT  RIVER 


503 


‘Hoy  there,  Aragorn!’  shouted  Boromir,  as  his  boat 
bumped  into  the  leader.  ‘This  is  madness!  We  cannot  dare 
the  Rapids  by  night!  But  no  boat  can  live  in  Sarn  Gebir,  be 
it  night  or  day.’ 

‘Back,  back!’  cried  Aragorn.  ‘Turn!  Turn  if  you  can!’  He 
drove  his  paddle  into  the  water,  trying  to  hold  the  boat  and 
bring  it  round. 

‘I  am  out  of  my  reckoning,’  he  said  to  Frodo.  ‘I  did  not 
know  that  we  had  come  so  far:  Anduin  flows  faster  than  I 
thought.  Sarn  Gebir  must  be  close  at  hand  already.’ 

With  great  efforts  they  checked  the  boats  and  slowly 
brought  them  about;  but  at  first  they  could  make  only  small 
headway  against  the  current,  and  all  the  time  they  were 
carried  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  eastern  bank.  Now  dark  and 
ominous  it  loomed  up  in  the  night. 

‘All  together,  paddle!’  shouted  Boromir.  ‘Paddle!  Or  we 
shall  be  driven  on  the  shoals.’  Even  as  he  spoke  Frodo  felt 
the  keel  beneath  him  grate  upon  stone. 

At  that  moment  there  was  a  twang  of  bowstrings:  several 
arrows  whistled  over  them,  and  some  fell  among  them.  One 
smote  Frodo  between  the  shoulders  and  he  lurched  forward 
with  a  cry,  letting  go  his  paddle:  but  the  arrow  fell  back, 
foiled  by  his  hidden  coat  of  mail.  Another  passed  through 
Aragorn’s  hood;  and  a  third  stood  fast  in  the  gunwale  of  the 
second  boat,  close  by  Merry’s  hand.  Sam  thought  he  could 
glimpse  black  figures  running  to  and  fro  upon  the  long 
shingle-banks  that  lay  under  the  eastern  shore.  They  seemed 
very  near. 

‘  Yrch /’  said  Legolas,  falling  into  his  own  tongue. 

‘Ores!’  cried  Gimli. 

‘Gollum’s  doing,  I’ll  be  bound,’  said  Sam  to  Frodo.  ‘And 
a  nice  place  to  choose,  too.  The  River  seems  set  on  taking  us 
right  into  their  arms!’ 

They  all  leaned  forward  straining  at  the  paddles:  even  Sam 
took  a  hand.  Every  moment  they  expected  to  feel  the  bite  of 
black-feathered  arrows.  Many  whined  overhead  or  struck  the 


504  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

water  nearby;  but  there  were  no  more  hits.  It  was  dark,  but 
not  too  dark  for  the  night-eyes  of  Ores,  and  in  the  star- 
glimmer  they  must  have  offered  their  cunning  foes  some 
mark,  unless  it  was  that  the  grey  cloaks  of  Lorien  and  the 
grey  timber  of  the  elf-wrought  boats  defeated  the  malice  of 
the  archers  of  Mordor. 

Stroke  by  stroke  they  laboured  on.  In  the  darkness  it  was 
hard  to  be  sure  that  they  were  indeed  moving  at  all;  but  slowly 
the  swirl  of  the  water  grew  less,  and  the  shadow  of  the  eastern 
bank  faded  back  into  the  night.  At  last,  as  far  as  they  could 
judge,  they  had  reached  the  middle  of  the  stream  again  and 
had  driven  their  boats  back  some  distance  above  the  jutting 
rocks.  Then  half  turning  they  thrust  them  with  all  their 
strength  towards  the  western  shore.  Under  the  shadow  of 
bushes  leaning  out  over  the  water  they  halted  and  drew 
breath. 

Legolas  laid  down  his  paddle  and  took  up  the  bow  that  he 
had  brought  from  Lorien.  Then  he  sprang  ashore  and 
climbed  a  few  paces  up  the  bank.  Stringing  the  bow  and 
fitting  an  arrow  he  turned,  peering  back  over  the  River  into 
the  darkness.  Across  the  water  there  were  shrill  cries,  but 
nothing  could  be  seen. 

Frodo  looked  up  at  the  Elf  standing  tall  above  him,  as  he 
gazed  into  the  night,  seeking  a  mark  to  shoot  at.  His  head 
was  dark,  crowned  with  sharp  white  stars  that  glittered  in  the 
black  pools  of  the  sky  behind.  But  now  rising  and  sailing  up 
from  the  South  the  great  clouds  advanced,  sending  out  dark 
outriders  into  the  starry  fields.  A  sudden  dread  fell  on  the 
Company. 

‘Elbereth  Gilthonieir  sighed  Legolas  as  he  looked  up.  Even 
as  he  did  so,  a  dark  shape,  like  a  cloud  and  yet  not  a  cloud, 
for  it  moved  far  more  swiftly,  came  out  of  the  blackness  in 
the  South,  and  sped  towards  the  Company,  blotting  out  all 
light  as  it  approached.  Soon  it  appeared  as  a  great  winged 
creature,  blacker  than  the  pits  in  the  night.  Fierce  voices  rose 
up  to  greet  it  from  across  the  water.  Frodo  felt  a  sudden  chill 
running  through  him  and  clutching  at  his  heart;  there  was  a 


THE  GREAT  RIVER  505 

deadly  cold,  like  the  memory  of  an  old  wound,  in  his  shoulder. 
He  crouched  down,  as  if  to  hide. 

Suddenly  the  great  bow  of  Lorien  sang.  Shrill  went  the 
arrow  from  the  elven-string.  Frodo  looked  up.  Almost  above 
him  the  winged  shape  swerved.  There  was  a  harsh  croaking 
scream,  as  it  fell  out  of  the  air,  vanishing  down  into  the  gloom 
of  the  eastern  shore.  The  sky  was  clean  again.  There  was  a 
tumult  of  many  voices  far  away,  cursing  and  wailing  in  the 
darkness,  and  then  silence.  Neither  shaft  nor  cry  came  again 
from  the  east  that  night. 

After  a  while  Aragorn  led  the  boats  back  upstream.  They 
felt  their  way  along  the  water’s  edge  for  some  distance,  until 
they  found  a  small  shallow  bay.  A  few  low  trees  grew  there 
close  to  the  water,  and  behind  them  rose  a  steep  rocky  hank. 
Here  the  Company  decided  to  stay  and  await  the  dawn:  it 
was  useless  to  attempt  to  move  further  by  night.  They  made 
no  camp  and  lit  no  fire,  but  lay  huddled  in  the  boats,  moored 
close  together. 

‘Praised  be  the  bow  of  Galadriel,  and  the  hand  and  eye  of 
Legolas!’  said  Gimli,  as  he  munched  a  wafer  of  lembas.  ‘That 
was  a  mighty  shot  in  the  dark,  my  friend!’ 

‘But  who  can  say  what  it  hit?’  said  Legolas. 

‘I  cannot,’  said  Gimli.  ‘But  I  am  glad  that  the  shadow  came 
no  nearer.  I  liked  it  not  at  all.  Too  much  it  reminded  me  of 
the  shadow  in  Moria  -  the  shadow  of  the  Balrog,’  he  ended 
in  a  whisper. 

‘It  was  not  a  Balrog,’  said  Frodo,  still  shivering  with  the 
chill  that  had  come  upon  him.  ‘It  was  something  colder.  I 
think  it  was - ’  Then  he  paused  and  fell  silent. 

‘What  do  you  think?’  asked  Boromir  eagerly,  leaning  from 
his  boat,  as  if  he  was  trying  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  Frodo’s  face. 

‘I  think — No,  I  will  not  say,’  answered  Frodo.  ‘Whatever 
it  was,  its  fall  has  dismayed  our  enemies.’ 

‘So  it  seems,’  said  Aragorn.  ‘Yet  where  they  are,  and  how 
many,  and  what  they  will  do  next,  we  do  not  know.  This 
night  we  must  all  be  sleepless!  Dark  hides  us  now.  But  what 


506  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

the  day  will  show  who  can  tell?  Have  your  weapons  close  to 
hand!’ 

Sam  sat  tapping  the  hilt  of  his  sword  as  if  he  were  counting 
on  his  fingers,  and  looking  up  at  the  sky.  ‘It’s  very  strange,’ 
he  murmured.  ‘The  Moon’s  the  same  in  the  Shire  and  in 
Wilderland,  or  it  ought  to  be.  But  either  it’s  out  of  its  running, 
or  I’m  all  wrong  in  my  reckoning.  You’ll  remember,  Mr. 
Frodo,  the  Moon  was  waning  as  we  lay  on  the  flet  up  in  that 
tree:  a  week  from  the  full,  I  reckon.  And  we’d  been  a  week 
on  the  way  last  night,  when  up  pops  a  New  Moon  as  thin  as 
a  nail-paring,  as  if  we  had  never  stayed  no  time  in  the  Elvish 
country. 

‘Well,  I  can  remember  three  nights  there  for  certain,  and  I 
seem  to  remember  several  more,  but  I  would  take  my  oath  it 
was  never  a  whole  month.  Anyone  would  think  that  time  did 
not  count  in  there!’ 

‘And  perhaps  that  was  the  way  of  it,’  said  Frodo.  ‘In  that 
land,  maybe,  we  were  in  a  time  that  has  elsewhere  long  gone 
by.  It  was  not,  I  think,  until  Silverlode  bore  us  back  to  Anduin 
that  we  returned  to  the  time  that  flows  through  mortal  lands 
to  the  Great  Sea.  And  I  don’t  remember  any  moon,  either 
new  or  old,  in  Caras  Galadhon:  only  stars  by  night  and  sun 
by  day.’ 

Legolas  stirred  in  his  boat.  ‘Nay,  time  does  not  tarry  ever,’ 
he  said;  ‘but  change  and  growth  is  not  in  all  things  and  places 
alike.  For  the  Elves  the  world  moves,  and  it  moves  both  very 
swift  and  very  slow.  Swift,  because  they  themselves  change 
little,  and  all  else  fleets  by:  it  is  a  grief  to  them.  Slow,  because 
they  need  not  count  the  running  years,  not  for  themselves. 
The  passing  seasons  are  but  ripples  ever  repeated  in  the  long 
long  stream.  Yet  beneath  the  Sun  all  things  must  wear  to  an 
end  at  last.’ 

‘But  the  wearing  is  slow  in  Lorien,’  said  Frodo.  ‘The  power 
of  the  Lady  is  on  it.  Rich  are  the  hours,  though  short  they 
seem,  in  Caras  Galadhon,  where  Galadriel  wields  the  Elven- 
ring.’ 


THE  GREAT  RIVER 


507 


‘That  should  not  have  been  said  outside  Lorien,  not  even 
to  me,’  said  Aragorn.  ‘Speak  no  more  of  it!  But  so  it  is,  Sam: 
in  that  land  you  lost  your  count.  There  time  flowed  swiftly 
by  us,  as  for  the  Elves.  The  old  moon  passed,  and  a  new 
moon  waxed  and  waned  in  the  world  outside,  while  we  tarried 
there.  And  yestereve  a  new  moon  came  again.  Winter  is 
nearly  gone.  Time  flows  on  to  a  spring  of  little  hope.’ 

The  night  passed  silently.  No  voice  or  call  was  heard  again 
across  the  water.  The  travellers  huddled  in  their  boats  felt  the 
changing  of  the  weather.  The  air  grew  warm  and  very  still 
under  the  great  moist  clouds  that  had  floated  up  from  the 
South  and  the  distant  seas.  The  rushing  of  the  River  over 
the  rocks  of  the  rapids  seemed  to  grow  louder  and  closer. 
The  twigs  of  the  trees  above  them  began  to  drip. 

When  the  day  came  the  mood  of  the  world  about  them  had 
become  soft  and  sad.  Slowly  the  dawn  grew  to  a  pale  light, 
diffused  and  shadowless.  There  was  mist  on  the  River,  and 
white  fog  swathed  the  shore;  the  far  hank  could  not  be  seen. 

‘I  can’t  abide  fog,’  said  Sam;  ‘but  this  seems  to  be  a  lucky 
one.  Now  perhaps  we  can  get  away  without  those  cursed 
goblins  seeing  us.’ 

‘Perhaps  so,’  said  Aragorn.  ‘But  it  will  be  hard  to  find  the 
path  unless  the  fog  lifts  a  little  later  on.  And  we  must  find  the 
path,  if  we  are  to  pass  Sarn  Gebir  and  come  to  the  Emyn 
Muil.’ 

‘I  do  not  see  why  we  should  pass  the  Rapids  or  follow  the 
River  any  further,’  said  Boromir.  ‘If  the  Emyn  Muil  lie  before 
us,  then  we  can  abandon  these  cockle-boats,  and  strike  west¬ 
ward  and  southward,  until  we  come  to  the  Entwash  and  cross 
into  my  own  land.’ 

We  can,  if  we  are  malting  for  Minas  Tirith,’  said  Aragorn, 
‘but  that  is  not  yet  agreed.  And  such  a  course  may  be  more 
perilous  than  it  sounds.  The  vale  of  Entwash  is  flat  and  fenny, 
and  fog  is  a  deadly  peril  there  for  those  on  foot  and  laden.  I 
would  not  abandon  our  boats  until  we  must.  The  River  is  at 
least  a  path  that  cannot  be  missed.’ 


508  the  fellowship  of  the  ring 

‘But  the  Enemy  holds  the  eastern  bank,’  objected  Boromir. 
‘And  even  if  you  pass  the  Gates  of  Argonath  and  come 
unmolested  to  the  Tindrock,  what  will  you  do  then?  Leap 
down  the  Falls  and  land  in  the  marshes?’ 

‘No!’  answered  Aragorn.  ‘Say  rather  that  we  will  bear  our 
boats  by  the  ancient  way  to  Rauros-foot,  and  there  take  to 
the  water  again.  Do  you  not  know,  Boromir,  or  do  you  choose 
to  forget  the  North  Stair,  and  the  high  seat  upon  Amon  Hen, 
that  were  made  in  the  days  of  the  great  kings?  I  at  least  have 
a  mind  to  stand  in  that  high  place  again,  before  I  decide  my 
further  course.  There,  maybe,  we  shall  see  some  sign  that 
will  guide  us.’ 

Boromir  held  out  long  against  this  choice;  but  when  it 
became  plain  that  Frodo  would  follow  Aragorn,  wherever  he 
went,  he  gave  in.  ‘It  is  not  the  way  of  the  Men  of  Minas 
Tirith  to  desert  their  friends  at  need,’  he  said,  ‘and  you  will 
need  my  strength,  if  ever  you  are  to  reach  the  Tindrock.  To 
the  tall  isle  I  will  go,  but  no  further.  There  I  shall  turn  to  my 
home,  alone  if  my  help  has  not  earned  the  reward  of  any 
companionship.’ 

The  day  was  now  growing,  and  the  fog  had  lifted  a  little. 
It  was  decided  that  Aragorn  and  Legolas  should  at  once  go 
forward  along  the  shore,  while  the  others  remained  by  the 
boats.  Aragorn  hoped  to  find  some  way  by  which  they  could 
carry  both  their  boats  and  their  baggage  to  the  smoother 
water  beyond  the  Rapids. 

‘Boats  of  the  Elves  would  not  sink,  maybe,’  he  said,  ‘but 
that  does  not  say  that  we  should  come  through  Sarn  Gebir 
alive.  None  have  ever  done  so  yet.  No  road  was  made  by  the 
Men  of  Gondor  in  this  region,  for  even  in  their  great  days 
their  realm  did  not  reach  up  Anduin  beyond  the  Emyn  Muil; 
but  there  is  a  portage-way  somewhere  on  the  western  shore, 
if  I  can  find  it.  It  cannot  yet  have  perished;  for  light  boats 
used  to  journey  out  of  Wilderland  down  to  Osgiliath,  and  still 
did  so  until  a  few  years  ago,  when  the  Ores  of  Mordor  began 
to  multiply.’ 


THE  GREAT  RIVER 


509 


‘Seldom  in  my  life  has  any  boat  come  out  of  the  North,  and 
the  Ores  prowl  on  the  east-shore,’  said  Boromir.  ‘If  you  go  for¬ 
ward,  peril  will  grow  with  every  mile,  even  if  you  find  a  path.’ 

‘Peril  lies  ahead  on  every  southward  road,’  answered 
Aragorn.  ‘Wait  for  us  one  day.  If  we  do  not  return  in  that 
time,  you  will  know  that  evil  has  indeed  befallen  us.  Then 
you  must  take  a  new  leader  and  follow  him  as  best  you  can.’ 

It  was  with  a  heavy  heart  that  Frodo  saw  Aragorn  and 
Legolas  climb  the  steep  hank  and  vanish  into  the  mists;  but 
his  fears  proved  groundless.  Only  two  or  three  hours  had 
passed,  and  it  was  barely  mid-day,  when  the  shadowy  shapes 
of  the  explorers  appeared  again. 

‘All  is  well,’  said  Aragorn,  as  he  clambered  down  the  hank. 
‘There  is  a  track,  and  it  leads  to  a  good  landing  that  is  still 
serviceable.  The  distance  is  not  great:  the  head  of  the  Rapids 
is  but  half  a  mile  below  us,  and  they  are  little  more  than  a 
mile  long.  Not  far  beyond  them  the  stream  becomes  clear 
and  smooth  again,  though  it  runs  swiftly.  Our  hardest  task 
will  be  to  get  our  boats  and  baggage  to  the  old  portage-way. 
We  have  found  it,  but  it  lies  well  back  from  the  water-side 
here,  and  runs  under  the  lee  of  a  rock-wall,  a  furlong  or  more 
from  the  shore.  We  did  not  find  where  the  northward  landing 
lies.  If  it  still  remains,  we  must  have  passed  it  yesterday  night. 
We  might  labour  far  upstream  and  yet  miss  it  in  the  fog.  I 
fear  we  must  leave  the  River  now,  and  make  for  the  portage¬ 
way  as  best  we  can  from  here.’ 

‘That  would  not  be  easy,  even  if  we  were  all  Men,’  said 
Boromir. 

‘Yet  such  as  we  are  we  will  try  it,’  said  Aragorn. 

‘Aye,  we  will,’  said  Gimli.  ‘The  legs  of  Men  will  lag  on  a 
rough  road,  while  a  Dwarf  goes  on,  be  the  burden  twice  his 
own  weight,  Master  Boromir!’ 

The  task  proved  hard  indeed,  yet  in  the  end  it  was  done. 
The  goods  were  taken  out  of  the  boats  and  brought  to  the 
top  of  the  bank,  where  there  was  a  level  space.  Then  the 
boats  were  drawn  out  of  the  water  and  carried  up.  They  were 


510  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

far  less  heavy  than  any  had  expected.  Of  what  tree  growing 
in  the  Elvish  country  they  were  made  not  even  Legolas  knew; 
but  the  wood  was  tough  and  yet  strangely  light.  Merry  and 
Pippin  alone  could  carry  their  boat  with  ease  along  the  flat. 
Nonetheless  it  needed  the  strength  of  the  two  Men  to  lift  and 
haul  them  over  the  ground  that  the  Company  now  had  to 
cross.  It  sloped  up  away  from  the  River,  a  tumbled  waste  of 
grey  limestone-boulders,  with  many  hidden  holes  shrouded 
with  weeds  and  bushes;  there  were  thickets  of  brambles,  and 
sheer  dells;  and  here  and  there  boggy  pools  fed  by  waters 
trickling  from  the  terraces  further  inland. 

One  by  one  Boromir  and  Aragorn  carried  the  boats,  while 
the  others  toiled  and  scrambled  after  them  with  the  baggage. 
At  last  all  was  removed  and  laid  on  the  portage-way.  Then 
with  little  further  hindrance,  save  from  sprawling  briars  and 
many  fallen  stones,  they  moved  forward  all  together.  Fog  still 
hung  in  veils  upon  the  crumbling  rock-wall,  and  to  their 
left  mist  shrouded  the  River:  they  could  hear  it  rushing  and 
foaming  over  the  sharp  shelves  and  stony  teeth  of  Sarn  Gebir, 
but  they  could  not  see  it.  Twice  they  made  the  journey,  before 
all  was  brought  safe  to  the  southern  landing. 

There  the  portage-way,  turning  back  to  the  water-side,  ran 
gently  down  to  the  shallow  edge  of  a  little  pool.  It  seemed  to 
have  been  scooped  in  the  river-side,  not  by  hand,  but  by  the 
water  swirling  down  from  Sarn  Gebir  against  a  low  pier  of 
rock  that  jutted  out  some  way  into  the  stream.  Beyond  it  the 
shore  rose  sheer  into  a  grey  cliff,  and  there  was  no  further 
passage  for  those  on  foot. 

Already  the  short  afternoon  was  past,  and  a  dim  cloudy 
dusk  was  closing  in.  They  sat  beside  the  water  listening  to 
the  confused  rush  and  roar  of  the  Rapids  hidden  in  the  mist; 
they  were  tired  and  sleepy,  and  their  hearts  were  as  gloomy 
as  the  dying  day. 

‘Well,  here  we  are,  and  here  we  must  pass  another  night,’ 
said  Boromir.  ‘We  need  sleep,  and  even  if  Aragorn  had  a 
mind  to  pass  the  Gates  of  Argonath  by  night,  we  are  all  too 
tired  -  except,  no  doubt,  our  sturdy  dwarf.’ 


THE  GREAT  RIVER 


511 


Gimli  made  no  reply:  he  was  nodding  as  he  sat. 

‘Let  us  rest  as  much  as  we  can  now,’  said  Aragorn. 
‘Tomorrow  we  must  journey  by  day  again.  Unless  the 
weather  changes  once  more  and  cheats  us,  we  shall  have  a 
good  chance  of  slipping  through,  unseen  by  any  eyes  on  the 
eastern  shore.  But  tonight  two  must  watch  together  in  turns: 
three  hours  off  and  one  on  guard.’ 

Nothing  happened  that  night  worse  than  a  brief  drizzle  of 
rain  an  hour  before  dawn.  As  soon  as  it  was  fully  light  they 
started.  Already  the  fog  was  thinning.  They  kept  as  close  as 
they  could  to  the  western  side,  and  they  could  see  the  dim 
shapes  of  the  low  cliffs  rising  ever  higher,  shadowy  walls  with 
their  feet  in  the  hurrying  river.  In  the  mid-morning  the  clouds 
drew  down  lower,  and  it  began  to  rain  heavily.  They  drew 
the  skin-covers  over  their  boats  to  prevent  them  from  being 
flooded,  and  drifted  on;  little  could  be  seen  before  them  or 
about  them  through  the  grey  falling  curtains. 

The  rain,  however,  did  not  last  long.  Slowly  the  sky  above 
grew  lighter,  and  then  suddenly  the  clouds  broke,  and  their 
draggled  fringes  trailed  away  northward  up  the  River.  The 
fogs  and  mists  were  gone.  Before  the  travellers  lay  a  wide 
ravine,  with  great  rocky  sides  to  which  clung,  upon  shelves 
and  in  narrow  crevices,  a  few  thrawn  trees.  The  channel  grew 
narrower  and  the  River  swifter.  Now  they  were  speeding 
along  with  little  hope  of  stopping  or  turning,  whatever  they 
might  meet  ahead.  Over  them  was  a  lane  of  pale-blue  sky, 
around  them  the  dark  overshadowed  River,  and  before  them 
black,  shutting  out  the  sun,  the  hills  of  Emyn  Muil,  in  which 
no  opening  could  be  seen. 

Frodo  peering  forward  saw  in  the  distance  two  great  rocks 
approaching:  like  great  pinnacles  or  pillars  of  stone  they 
seemed.  Tall  and  sheer  and  ominous  they  stood  upon  either 
side  of  the  stream.  A  narrow  gap  appeared  between  them, 
and  the  River  swept  the  boats  towards  it. 

‘Behold  the  Argonath,  the  Pillars  of  the  Kings!’  cried 
Aragorn.  ‘We  shall  pass  them  soon.  Keep  the  boats  in  line, 


512  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

and  as  far  apart  as  you  can!  Hold  the  middle  of  the  stream!’ 

As  Frodo  was  borne  towards  them  the  great  pillars  rose 
like  towers  to  meet  him.  Giants  they  seemed  to  him,  vast  grey 
figures  silent  but  threatening.  Then  he  saw  that  they  were 
indeed  shaped  and  fashioned:  the  craft  and  power  of  old  had 
wrought  upon  them,  and  still  they  preserved  through  the  suns 
and  rains  of  forgotten  years  the  mighty  likenesses  in  which 
they  had  been  hewn.  Upon  great  pedestals  founded  in  the 
deep  waters  stood  two  great  kings  of  stone:  still  with  blurred 
eyes  and  crannied  brows  they  frowned  upon  the  North.  The 
left  hand  of  each  was  raised  palm  outwards  in  gesture  of 
warning;  in  each  right  hand  there  was  an  axe;  upon  each  head 
there  was  a  crumbling  helm  and  crown.  Great  power  and 
majesty  they  still  wore,  the  silent  wardens  of  a  long-vanished 
kingdom.  Awe  and  fear  fell  upon  Frodo,  and  he  cowered 
down,  shutting  his  eyes  and  not  daring  to  look  up  as  the  boat 
drew  near.  Even  Boromir  bowed  his  head  as  the  boats  whirled 
by,  frail  and  fleeting  as  little  leaves,  under  the  enduring 
shadow  of  the  sentinels  of  Numenor.  So  they  passed  into  the 
dark  chasm  of  the  Gates. 

Sheer  rose  the  dreadful  cliffs  to  unguessed  heights  on  either 
side.  Far  off  was  the  dim  sky.  The  black  waters  roared  and 
echoed,  and  a  wind  screamed  over  them.  Frodo  crouching 
over  his  knees  heard  Sam  in  front  muttering  and  groaning: 
‘What  a  place!  What  a  horrible  place!  Just  let  me  get  out  of 
this  boat,  and  I’ll  never  wet  my  toes  in  a  puddle  again,  let 
alone  a  river!’ 

‘Fear  not!’  said  a  strange  voice  behind  him.  Frodo  turned 
and  saw  Strider,  and  yet  not  Strider;  for  the  weatherworn 
Ranger  was  no  longer  there.  In  the  stern  sat  Aragorn  son  of 
Arathorn,  proud  and  erect,  guiding  the  boat  with  skilful 
strokes;  his  hood  was  cast  back,  and  his  dark  hair  was  blowing 
in  the  wind,  a  light  was  in  his  eyes:  a  king  returning  from 
exile  to  his  own  land. 

‘Fear  not!’  he  said.  ‘Long  have  I  desired  to  look  upon  the 
likenesses  of  Isildur  and  Anarion,  my  sires  of  old.  Under  their 
shadow  Elessar,  the  Elfstone  son  of  Arathorn  of  the  House 


THE  GREAT  RIVER 


513 


of  Valandil  Isildur’s  son,  heir  of  Elendil,  has  naught  to  dread!’ 

Then  the  light  of  his  eyes  faded,  and  he  spoke  to  himself: 
‘Would  that  Gandalf  were  here!  How  my  heart  yearns  for 
Minas  Anor  and  the  walls  of  my  own  city!  But  whither  now 
shah  I  go?’ 

The  chasm  was  long  and  dark,  and  filled  with  the  noise  of 
wind  and  rushing  water  and  echoing  stone.  It  bent  somewhat 
towards  the  west  so  that  at  first  all  was  dark  ahead;  but  soon 
Frodo  saw  a  tall  gap  of  light  before  him,  ever  growing.  Swiftly 
it  drew  near,  and  suddenly  the  boats  shot  through,  out  into 
a  wide  clear  light. 

The  sun,  already  long  fallen  from  the  noon,  was  shining  in 
a  windy  sky.  The  pent  waters  spread  out  into  a  long  oval 
lake,  pale  Nen  Hithoel,  fenced  by  steep  grey  hills  whose  sides 
were  clad  with  trees,  but  their  heads  were  bare,  cold-gleaming 
in  the  sunlight.  At  the  far  southern  end  rose  three  peaks. 
The  midmost  stood  somewhat  forward  from  the  others  and 
sundered  from  them,  an  island  in  the  waters,  about  which 
the  flowing  River  flung  pale  shimmering  arms.  Distant  but 
deep  there  came  up  on  the  wind  a  roaring  sound  like  the  roll 
of  thunder  heard  far  away. 

‘Behold  Tol  Brandir!’  said  Aragorn,  pointing  south  to  the 
tall  peak.  ‘Upon  the  left  stands  Amon  Lhaw,  and  upon  the 
right  is  Amon  Hen,  the  Hills  of  Hearing  and  of  Sight.  In 
the  days  of  the  great  kings  there  were  high  seats  upon  them, 
and  watch  was  kept  there.  But  it  is  said  that  no  foot  of  man 
or  beast  has  ever  been  set  upon  Tol  Brandir.  Ere  the  shade 
of  night  falls  we  shall  come  to  them.  I  hear  the  endless  voice 
of  Rauros  calling.’ 

The  Company  rested  now  for  a  while,  drifting  south  on 
the  current  that  flowed  through  the  middle  of  the  lake.  They 
ate  some  food,  and  then  they  took  to  their  paddles  and 
hastened  on  their  way.  The  sides  of  the  westward  hills  fell 
into  shadow,  and  the  Sun  grew  round  and  red.  Here  and 
there  a  misty  star  peered  out.  The  three  peaks  loomed  before 
them,  darkling  in  the  twilight.  Rauros  was  roaring  with  a  great 


514  THE  fellowship  of  the  ring 

voice.  Already  night  was  laid  on  the  flowing  waters  when  the 
travellers  came  at  last  under  the  shadow  of  the  hills. 

The  tenth  day  of  their  journey  was  over.  Wilderland  was 
behind  them.  They  could  go  no  further  without  choice 
between  the  east-way  and  the  west.  The  last  stage  of  the 
Quest  was  before  them. 


Chapter  io 


THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  FELLOWSHIP 


Aragorn  led  them  to  the  right  arm  of  the  River.  Here  upon 
its  western  side  under  the  shadow  of  Tol  Brandir  a  green 
lawn  ran  down  to  the  water  from  the  feet  of  Amon  Hen. 
Behind  it  rose  the  first  gentle  slopes  of  the  hill  clad  with  trees, 
and  trees  marched  away  westward  along  the  curving  shores 
of  the  lake.  A  little  spring  fell  tumbling  down  and  fed  the 
grass. 

‘Here  we  will  rest  tonight,’  said  Aragorn.  ‘This  is  the  lawn 
of  Parth  Galen:  a  fair  place  in  the  summer  days  of  old.  Let 
us  hope  that  no  evil  has  yet  come  here.’ 

They  drew  up  their  boats  on  the  green  banks,  and  beside 
them  they  made  their  camp.  They  set  a  watch,  but  had  no 
sight  nor  sound  of  their  enemies.  If  Gollum  had  conttived  to 
follow  them,  he  remained  unseen  and  unheard.  Nonetheless 
as  the  night  wore  on  Aragorn  grew  uneasy,  tossing  often  in 
his  sleep  and  waking.  In  the  small  hours  he  got  up  and  came 
to  Frodo,  whose  turn  it  was  to  watch. 

‘Why  are  you  waking?’  asked  Frodo.  ‘It  is  not  your  watch.’ 

‘I  do  not  know,’  answered  Aragorn;  ‘but  a  shadow  and  a 
threat  has  been  growing  in  my  sleep.  It  would  be  well  to  draw 
your  sword.’ 

‘Why?’  said  Frodo.  ‘Are  enemies  at  hand?’ 

‘Let  us  see  what  Sting  may  show,’  answered  Aragorn. 

Frodo  then  drew  the  elf-blade  from  its  sheath.  To  his  dis¬ 
may  the  edges  gleamed  dimly  in  the  night.  ‘Ores!’  he  said. 
‘Not  very  near,  and  yet  too  near,  it  seems.’ 

‘I  feared  as  much,’  said  Aragorn.  ‘But  maybe  they  are  not 
on  this  side  of  the  River.  The  light  of  Sting  is  faint,  and  it 
may  point  to  no  more  than  spies  of  Mordor  roaming  on  the 
slopes  of  Amon  Lhaw.  I  have  never  heard  before  of  Ores 


5i6 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


upon  Amon  Hen.  Yet  who  knows  what  may  happen  in  these 
evil  days,  now  that  Minas  Tirith  no  longer  holds  secure  the 
passages  of  Anduin.  We  must  go  warily  tomorrow.’ 

The  day  came  like  fire  and  smoke.  Low  in  the  East  there 
were  black  bars  of  cloud  like  the  fumes  of  a  great  burning. 
The  rising  sun  lit  them  from  beneath  with  flames  of  murky 
red;  but  soon  it  climbed  above  them  into  a  clear  sky.  The 
summit  of  Tol  Brandir  was  tipped  with  gold.  Frodo  looked 
out  eastward  and  gazed  at  the  tall  island.  Its  sides  sprang 
sheer  out  of  the  running  water.  High  up  above  the  tall  cliffs 
were  steep  slopes  upon  which  trees  climbed,  mounting  one 
head  above  another;  and  above  them  again  were  grey  faces 
of  inaccessible  rock,  crowned  by  a  great  spire  of  stone.  Many 
birds  were  circling  about  it,  but  no  sign  of  other  living  things 
could  be  seen. 

When  they  had  eaten,  Aragorn  called  the  Company 
together.  ‘The  day  has  come  at  last,’  he  said:  ‘the  day  of 
choice  which  we  have  long  delayed.  What  shall  now  become 
of  our  Company  that  has  travelled  so  far  in  fellowship?  Shall 
we  turn  west  with  Boromir  and  go  to  the  wars  of  Gondor;  or 
turn  east  to  the  Fear  and  Shadow;  or  shall  we  break  our 
fellowship  and  go  this  way  and  that  as  each  may  choose? 
Whatever  we  do  must  be  done  soon.  We  cannot  long  halt 
here.  The  enemy  is  on  the  eastern  shore,  we  know;  but  I  fear 
that  the  Ores  may  already  be  on  this  side  of  the  water.’ 

There  was  a  long  silence  in  which  no  one  spoke  or  moved. 

Well,  Frodo,’  said  Aragorn  at  last.  ‘I  fear  that  the  burden 
is  laid  upon  you.  You  are  the  Bearer  appointed  by  the  Coun¬ 
cil.  Your  own  way  you  alone  can  choose.  In  this  matter  I 
cannot  advise  you.  I  am  not  Gandalf,  and  though  I  have  tried 
to  bear  his  part,  I  do  not  know  what  design  or  hope  he  had 
for  this  hour,  if  indeed  he  had  any.  Most  likely  it  seems  that 
if  he  were  here  now  the  choice  would  still  wait  on  you.  Such 
is  your  fate.’ 

Frodo  did  not  answer  at  once.  Then  he  spoke  slowly.  ‘I 
know  that  haste  is  needed,  yet  I  cannot  choose.  The  burden 


THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  FELLOWSHIP  517 

is  heavy.  Give  me  an  hour  longer,  and  I  will  speak.  Let  me 
be  alone!’ 

Aragorn  looked  at  him  with  kindly  pity.  ‘Very  well,  Frodo 
son  of  Drogo,’  he  said.  ‘You  shall  have  an  hour,  and  you 
shall  be  alone.  We  will  stay  here  for  a  while.  But  do  not  stray 
far  or  out  of  call.’ 

Frodo  sat  for  a  moment  with  his  head  bowed.  Sam,  who 
had  been  watching  his  master  with  great  concern,  shook  his 
head  and  muttered:  ‘Plain  as  a  pikestaff  it  is,  but  it’s  no  good 
Sam  Gamgee  putting  in  his  spoke  just  now.’ 

Presently  Frodo  got  up  and  walked  away;  and  Sam  saw 
that  while  the  others  restrained  themselves  and  did  not  stare 
at  him,  the  eyes  of  Boromir  followed  Frodo  intently,  until  he 
passed  out  of  sight  in  the  trees  at  the  foot  of  Amon  Hen. 

Wandering  aimlessly  at  first  in  the  wood,  Frodo  found  that 
his  feet  were  leading  him  up  towards  the  slopes  of  the  hill. 
He  came  to  a  path,  the  dwindling  ruins  of  a  road  of  long  ago. 
In  steep  places  stairs  of  stone  had  been  hewn,  but  now  they 
were  cracked  and  worn,  and  split  by  the  roots  of  trees.  For 
some  while  he  climbed,  not  caring  which  way  he  went,  until 
he  came  to  a  grassy  place.  Rowan-trees  grew  about  it,  and  in 
the  midst  was  a  wide  flat  stone.  The  little  upland  lawn  was 
open  upon  the  East  and  was  filled  now  with  the  early  sunlight. 
Frodo  halted  and  looked  out  over  the  River,  far  below  him, 
to  Tol  Brandir  and  the  birds  wheeling  in  the  great  gulf  of  air 
between  him  and  the  untrodden  isle.  The  voice  of  Rauros 
was  a  mighty  roaring  mingled  with  a  deep  throbbing  boom. 

He  sat  down  upon  the  stone  and  cupped  his  chin  in  his 
hands,  staring  eastwards  but  seeing  little  with  his  eyes.  All 
that  had  happened  since  Bilbo  left  the  Shire  was  passing 
through  his  mind,  and  he  recalled  and  pondered  everything 
that  he  could  remember  of  Gandalf ’s  words.  Time  went  on, 
and  still  he  was  no  nearer  to  a  choice. 

Suddenly  he  awoke  from  his  thoughts:  a  strange  feeling 
came  to  him  that  something  was  behind  him,  that  unfriendly 
eyes  were  upon  him.  He  sprang  up  and  turned;  but  all  that 


5 1 8 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


he  saw  to  his  surprise  was  Boromir,  and  his  face  was  smiling 
and  kind. 

‘I  was  afraid  for  you,  Frodo,’  he  said,  coming  forward.  ‘If 
Aragorn  is  right  and  Ores  are  near,  then  none  of  us  should 
wander  alone,  and  you  least  of  all:  so  much  depends  on  you. 
And  my  heart  too  is  heavy.  May  I  stay  now  and  talk  for  a 
while,  since  I  have  found  you?  It  would  comfort  me.  Where 
there  are  so  many,  all  speech  becomes  a  debate  without  end. 
But  two  together  may  perhaps  find  wisdom.’ 

‘You  are  kind,’  answered  Frodo.  ‘But  I  do  not  think  that 
any  speech  will  help  me.  For  I  know  what  I  should  do,  but  I 
am  afraid  of  doing  it,  Boromir:  afraid.’ 

Boromir  stood  silent.  Rauros  roared  endlessly  on.  The 
wind  murmured  in  the  branches  of  the  trees.  Frodo  shivered. 

Suddenly  Boromir  came  and  sat  beside  him.  ‘Are  you  sure 
that  you  do  not  suffer  needlessly?’  he  said.  ‘I  wish  to  help  you. 
Y ou  need  counsel  in  your  hard  choice.  Will  you  not  take  mine?’ 

‘I  think  I  know  already  what  counsel  you  would  give, 
Boromir,’  said  Frodo.  ‘And  it  would  seem  like  wisdom  but 
for  the  warning  of  my  heart.’ 

Warning?  Warning  against  what?’  said  Boromir  sharply. 

‘Against  delay.  Against  the  way  that  seems  easier.  Against 
refusal  of  the  burden  that  is  laid  on  me.  Against  -  well,  if  it 
must  be  said,  against  trust  in  the  strength  and  truth  of  Men.’ 

‘Yet  that  strength  has  long  protected  you  far  away  in  your 
little  country,  though  you  knew  it  not.’ 

‘I  do  not  doubt  the  valour  of  your  people.  But  the  world  is 
changing.  The  walls  of  Minas  Tirith  may  be  strong,  but  they 
are  not  strong  enough.  If  they  fail,  what  then?’ 

‘We  shall  fall  in  battle  valiantly.  Yet  there  is  still  hope  that 
they  will  not  fail.’ 

‘No  hope  while  the  Ring  lasts,’  said  Frodo. 

‘Ah!  The  Ring!’  said  Boromir,  his  eyes  lighting.  ‘The  Ring! 
Is  it  not  a  strange  fate  that  we  should  suffer  so  much  fear  and 
doubt  for  so  small  a  thing?  So  small  a  thing!  And  I  have  seen 
it  only  for  an  instant  in  the  house  of  Elrond.  Could  I  not  have 
a  sight  of  it  again?’ 


THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  FELLOWSHIP  519 

Frodo  looked  up.  His  heart  went  suddenly  cold.  He  caught 
the  strange  gleam  in  Boromir’s  eyes,  yet  his  face  was  still  kind 
and  friendly.  ‘It  is  best  that  it  should  lie  hidden,’  he  answered. 

‘As  you  wish.  I  care  not,’  said  Boromir.  ‘Yet  may  I  not 
even  speak  of  it?  For  you  seem  ever  to  think  only  of  its  power 
in  the  hands  of  the  Enemy:  of  its  evil  uses  not  of  its  good. 
The  world  is  changing,  you  say.  Minas  Tirith  will  fall,  if  the 
Ring  lasts.  But  why?  Certainly,  if  the  Ring  were  with  the 
Enemy.  But  why,  if  it  were  with  us?’ 

‘Were  you  not  at  the  Council?’  answered  Frodo.  ‘Because 
we  cannot  use  it,  and  what  is  done  with  it  turns  to  evil.’ 

Boromir  got  up  and  walked  about  impatiently.  ‘So  you  go 
on,’  he  cried.  ‘Gandalf,  Elrond  -  all  these  folk  have  taught 
you  to  say  so.  For  themselves  they  may  be  right.  These  elves 
and  half-elves  and  wizards,  they  would  come  to  grief  perhaps. 
Yet  often  I  doubt  if  they  are  wise  and  not  merely  timid.  But 
each  to  his  own  kind.  True-hearted  Men,  they  will  not  be 
corrupted.  We  of  Minas  Tirith  have  been  staunch  through 
long  years  of  trial.  We  do  not  desire  the  power  of  wizard- 
lords,  only  strength  to  defend  ourselves,  strength  in  a  just 
cause.  And  behold!  in  our  need  chance  brings  to  light  the 
Ring  of  Power.  It  is  a  gift,  I  say;  a  gift  to  the  foes  of  Mordor. 
It  is  mad  not  to  use  it,  to  use  the  power  of  the  Enemy  against 
him.  The  fearless,  the  ruthless,  these  alone  will  achieve  vic¬ 
tory.  What  could  not  a  warrior  do  in  this  hour,  a  great  leader? 
What  could  not  Aragorn  do?  Or  if  he  refuses,  why  not 
Boromir?  The  Ring  would  give  me  power  of  Command. 
How  I  would  drive  the  hosts  of  Mordor,  and  all  men  would 
flock  to  my  banner!’ 

Boromir  strode  up  and  down,  speaking  ever  more  loudly. 
Almost  he  seemed  to  have  forgotten  Frodo,  while  his  talk 
dwelt  on  walls  and  weapons,  and  the  mustering  of  men;  and 
he  drew  plans  for  great  alliances  and  glorious  victories  to  be; 
and  he  cast  down  Mordor,  and  became  himself  a  mighty 
king,  benevolent  and  wise.  Suddenly  he  stopped  and  waved 
his  arms. 

‘And  they  tell  us  to  throw  it  away!’  he  cried.  ‘I  do  not  say 


520 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


destroy  it.  That  might  be  well,  if  reason  could  show  any  hope 
of  doing  so.  It  does  not.  The  only  plan  that  is  proposed  to 
us  is  that  a  halfling  should  walk  blindly  into  Mordor  and 
offer  the  Enemy  every  chance  of  recapturing  it  for  himself. 
Folly! 

‘Surely  you  see  it,  my  friend?’  he  said,  turning  now  sud¬ 
denly  to  Frodo  again.  ‘You  say  that  you  are  afraid.  If  it  is  so, 
the  boldest  should  pardon  you.  But  is  it  not  really  your  good 
sense  that  revolts?’ 

‘No,  I  am  afraid,’  said  Frodo.  ‘Simply  afraid.  But  I  am  glad 
to  have  heard  you  speak  so  fully.  My  mind  is  clearer  now.’ 

‘Then  you  will  come  to  Minas  Tirith?’  cried  Boromir.  His 
eyes  were  shining  and  his  face  eager. 

‘You  misunderstand  me,’  said  Frodo. 

‘But  you  will  come,  at  least  for  a  while?’  Boromir  persisted. 
‘My  city  is  not  far  now;  and  it  is  little  further  from  there  to 
Mordor  than  from  here.  We  have  been  long  in  the  wilderness, 
and  you  need  news  of  what  the  Enemy  is  doing  before  you 
make  a  move.  Come  with  me,  Frodo,’  he  said.  ‘You  need  rest 
before  your  venture,  if  go  you  must.’  He  laid  his  hand  on  the 
hobbit’s  shoulder  in  friendly  fashion;  but  Frodo  felt  the  hand 
trembling  with  suppressed  excitement.  He  stepped  quickly 
away,  and  eyed  with  alarm  the  tall  Man,  nearly  twice  his 
height  and  many  times  his  match  in  strength. 

‘Why  are  you  so  unfriendly?’  said  Boromir.  ‘I  am  a  true 
man,  neither  thief  nor  tracker.  I  need  your  Ring:  that  you 
know  now;  but  I  give  you  my  word  that  I  do  not  desire  to 
keep  it.  Will  you  not  at  least  let  me  make  trial  of  my  plan? 
Lend  me  the  Ring!’ 

‘No!  no!’  cried  Frodo.  ‘The  Council  laid  it  upon  me  to 
bear  it.’ 

‘It  is  by  our  own  folly  that  the  Enemy  will  defeat  us,’  cried 
Boromir.  ‘How  it  angers  me!  Fool!  Obstinate  fool!  Running 
wilfully  to  death  and  ruining  our  cause.  If  any  mortals  have 
claim  to  the  Ring,  it  is  the  men  of  Numenor,  and  not 
Halflings.  It  is  not  yours  save  by  unhappy  chance.  It  might 
have  been  mine.  It  should  be  mine.  Give  it  to  me!’ 


THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  FELLOWSHIP  5 21 

Frodo  did  not  answer,  but  moved  away  till  the  great  flat 
stone  stood  between  them.  ‘Come,  come,  my  friend!’  said 
Boromir  in  a  softer  voice.  ‘Why  not  get  rid  of  it?  Why  not  be 
free  of  your  doubt  and  fear?  You  can  lay  the  blame  on  me, 
if  you  will.  You  can  say  that  I  was  too  strong  and  took  it  by 
force.  For  I  am  too  strong  for  you,  halfling,’  he  cried;  and 
suddenly  he  sprang  over  the  stone  and  leaped  at  Frodo.  His 
fair  and  pleasant  face  was  hideously  changed;  a  raging  fire 
was  in  his  eyes. 

Frodo  dodged  aside  and  again  put  the  stone  between  them. 
There  was  only  one  thing  he  could  do:  trembling  he  pulled 
out  the  Ring  upon  its  chain  and  quickly  slipped  it  on  his 
finger,  even  as  Boromir  sprang  at  him  again.  The  Man 
gasped,  stared  for  a  moment  amazed,  and  then  ran  wildly 
about,  seeking  here  and  there  among  the  rocks  and  trees. 

‘Miserable  trickster!’  he  shouted.  ‘Let  me  get  my  hands  on 
you!  Now  I  see  your  mind.  You  will  take  the  Ring  to  Sauron 
and  sell  us  all.  You  have  only  waited  your  chance  to  leave  us 
in  the  lurch.  Curse  you  and  all  halflings  to  death  and  dark¬ 
ness!’  Then,  catching  his  foot  on  a  stone,  he  fell  sprawling 
and  lay  upon  his  face.  For  a  while  he  was  as  still  as  if  his  own 
curse  had  struck  him  down;  then  suddenly  he  wept. 

He  rose  and  passed  his  hand  over  his  eyes,  dashing  away 
the  tears.  ‘What  have  I  said?’  he  cried.  What  have  I  done? 
Frodo,  Frodo!’  he  called.  ‘Come  back!  A  madness  took  me, 
but  it  has  passed.  Come  back!’ 

There  was  no  answer.  Frodo  did  not  even  hear  his  cries. 
He  was  already  far  away,  leaping  blindly  up  the  path  to  the 
hill-top.  Terror  and  grief  shook  him,  seeing  in  his  thought 
the  mad  fierce  face  of  Boromir,  and  his  burning  eyes. 

Soon  he  came  out  alone  on  the  summit  of  Amon  Hen,  and 
halted,  gasping  for  breath.  He  saw  as  through  a  mist  a  wide 
flat  circle,  paved  with  mighty  flags,  and  surrounded  with  a 
crumbling  battlement;  and  in  the  middle,  set  upon  four 
carven  pillars,  was  a  high  seat,  reached  by  a  stair  of  many 
steps.  Up  he  went  and  sat  upon  the  ancient  chair,  feeling  like 


522  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

a  lost  child  that  had  clambered  upon  the  throne  of  mountain- 
kings. 

At  first  he  could  see  little.  He  seemed  to  be  in  a  world  of 
mist  in  which  there  were  only  shadows:  the  Ring  was  upon 
him.  Then  here  and  there  the  mist  gave  way  and  he  saw 
many  visions:  small  and  clear  as  if  they  were  under  his  eyes 
upon  a  table,  and  yet  remote.  There  was  no  sound,  only 
bright  living  images.  The  world  seemed  to  have  shrunk  and 
fallen  silent.  He  was  sitting  upon  the  Seat  of  Seeing,  on  Amon 
Hen,  the  Hill  of  the  Eye  of  the  Men  of  Numenor.  Eastward 
he  looked  into  wide  uncharted  lands,  nameless  plains,  and 
forests  unexplored.  Northward  he  looked,  and  the  Great 
River  lay  like  a  ribbon  beneath  him,  and  the  Misty  Mountains 
stood  small  and  hard  as  broken  teeth.  Westward  he  looked 
and  saw  the  broad  pastures  of  Rohan;  and  Orthanc,  the 
pinnacle  of  Isengard,  like  a  black  spike.  Southward  he 
looked,  and  below  his  very  feet  the  Great  River  curled  like  a 
toppling  wave  and  plunged  over  the  falls  of  Rauros  into  a 
foaming  pit;  a  glimmering  rainbow  played  upon  the  fume. 
And  Ethir  Anduin  he  saw,  the  mighty  delta  of  the  River,  and 
myriads  of  sea-birds  whirling  like  a  white  dust  in  the  sun, 
and  beneath  them  a  green  and  silver  sea,  rippling  in  endless 
lines. 

But  everywhere  he  looked  he  saw  the  signs  of  war.  The 
Misty  Mountains  were  crawling  like  anthills:  ores  were  issuing 
out  of  a  thousand  holes.  Under  the  boughs  of  Mirkwood 
there  was  deadly  strife  of  Elves  and  Men  and  fell  beasts.  The 
land  of  the  Beornings  was  aflame;  a  cloud  was  over  Moria; 
smoke  rose  on  the  borders  of  Lorien. 

Horsemen  were  galloping  on  the  grass  of  Rohan;  wolves 
poured  from  Isengard.  From  the  havens  of  Harad  ships  of 
war  put  out  to  sea;  and  out  of  the  East  Men  were  moving 
endlessly:  swordsmen,  spearmen,  bowmen  upon  horses, 
chariots  of  chieftains  and  laden  wains.  All  the  power  of  the 
Dark  Lord  was  in  motion.  Then  turning  south  again  he  beheld 
Minas  Tirith.  Far  away  it  seemed,  and  beautiful:  white -walled, 
many-towered,  proud  and  fair  upon  its  mountain-seat;  its 


THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  FELLOWSHIP  523 

battlements  glittered  with  steel,  and  its  turrets  were  bright  with 
many  banners.  Hope  leaped  in  his  heart.  But  against  Minas 
Tirith  was  set  another  fortress,  greater  and  more  strong. 
Thither,  eastward,  unwilling  his  eye  was  drawn.  It  passed 
the  ruined  bridges  of  Osgiliath,  the  grinning  gates  of  Minas 
Morgul,  and  the  haunted  Mountains,  and  it  looked  upon 
Gorgoroth,  the  valley  of  terror  in  the  Land  of  Mordor.  Dark¬ 
ness  lay  there  under  the  Sun.  Fire  glowed  amid  the  smoke. 
Mount  Doom  was  burning,  and  a  great  reek  rising.  Then 
at  last  his  gaze  was  held:  wall  upon  wall,  battlement  upon 
battlement,  black,  immeasurably  strong,  mountain  of  iron, 
gate  of  steel,  tower  of  adamant,  he  saw  it:  Barad-dur,  Fortress 
of  Sauron.  All  hope  left  him. 

And  suddenly  he  felt  the  Eye.  There  was  an  eye  in  the 
Dark  Tower  that  did  not  sleep.  He  knew  that  it  had  become 
aware  of  his  gaze.  A  fierce  eager  will  was  there.  It  leaped 
towards  him;  almost  like  a  finger  he  felt  it,  searching  for  him. 
Very  soon  it  would  nail  him  down,  know  just  exactly  where 
he  was.  Amon  Lhaw  it  touched.  It  glanced  upon  Tol  Brandir 
-  he  threw  himself  from  the  seat,  crouching,  covering  his 
head  with  his  grey  hood. 

He  heard  himself  crying  out:  Never,  never!  Or  was  it:  Verily 
I  come,  I  come  to  you ?  He  could  not  tell.  Then  as  a  flash  from 
some  other  point  of  power  there  came  to  his  mind  another 
thought:  Take  it  off!  Take  it  off!  Fool,  take  it  off!  Take  off  the 
Ring! 

The  two  powers  strove  in  him.  For  a  moment,  perfectly 
balanced  between  their  piercing  points,  he  writhed,  tor¬ 
mented.  Suddenly  he  was  aware  of  himself  again,  Frodo, 
neither  the  Voice  nor  the  Eye:  free  to  choose,  and  with  one 
remaining  instant  in  which  to  do  so.  He  took  the  Ring  off  his 
finger.  He  was  kneeling  in  clear  sunlight  before  the  high  seat. 
A  black  shadow  seemed  to  pass  like  an  arm  above  him;  it 
missed  Amon  Hen  and  groped  out  west,  and  faded.  Then  all 
the  sky  was  clean  and  blue  and  birds  sang  in  every  tree. 

Frodo  rose  to  his  feet.  A  great  weariness  was  on  him,  but 
his  will  was  firm  and  his  heart  lighter.  He  spoke  aloud  to 


524  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

himself.  ‘I  will  do  now  what  I  must,’  he  said.  ‘This  at  least  is 
plain:  the  evil  of  the  Ring  is  already  at  work  even  in  the 
Company,  and  the  Ring  must  leave  them  before  it  does  more 
harm.  I  will  go  alone.  Some  I  cannot  trust,  and  those  I  can 
trust  are  too  dear  to  me:  poor  old  Sam,  and  Merry  and 
Pippin.  Strider,  too:  his  heart  yearns  for  Minas  Tirith,  and 
he  will  be  needed  there,  now  Boromir  has  fallen  into  evil.  I 
will  go  alone.  At  once.’ 

He  went  quickly  down  the  path  and  came  back  to  the  lawn 
where  Boromir  had  found  him.  Then  he  halted,  listening.  He 
thought  he  could  hear  cries  and  calls  from  the  woods  near 
the  shore  below. 

‘They’ll  be  hunting  for  me,’  he  said.  ‘I  wonder  how  long  I 
have  been  away.  Hours,  I  should  think.’  He  hesitated.  ‘What 
can  I  do?’  he  muttered.  ‘I  must  go  now  or  I  shall  never  go.  I 
shan’t  get  a  chance  again.  I  hate  leaving  them,  and  like  this 
without  any  explanation.  But  surely  they  will  understand. 
Sam  will.  And  what  else  can  I  do?’ 

Slowly  he  drew  out  the  Ring  and  put  it  on  once  more.  He 
vanished  and  passed  down  the  hill,  less  than  a  rustle  of  the 
wind. 

The  others  remained  long  by  the  river-side.  For  some  time 
they  had  been  silent,  moving  restlessly  about;  but  now  they 
were  sitting  in  a  circle,  and  they  were  talking.  Every  now  and 
again  they  made  efforts  to  speak  of  other  things,  of  their 
long  road  and  many  adventures;  they  questioned  Aragorn 
concerning  the  realm  of  Gondor  and  its  ancient  history,  and 
the  remnants  of  its  great  works  that  could  still  be  seen  in  this 
strange  border-land  of  the  Emyn  Muil:  the  stone  kings  and 
the  seats  of  Lhaw  and  Hen,  and  the  great  Stair  beside  the 
falls  of  Rauros.  But  always  their  thoughts  and  words  strayed 
back  to  Frodo  and  the  Ring.  What  would  Frodo  choose  to 
do?  Why  was  he  hesitating? 

‘He  is  debating  which  course  is  the  most  desperate,  I  think,’ 
said  Aragorn.  ‘And  well  he  may.  It  is  now  more  hopeless  than 
ever  for  the  Company  to  go  east,  since  we  have  been  tracked 


THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  FELLOWSHIP  525 

by  Gollum,  and  must  fear  that  the  secret  of  our  journey  is 
already  betrayed.  But  Minas  Tirith  is  no  nearer  to  the  Fire 
and  the  destruction  of  the  Burden. 

‘We  may  remain  there  for  a  while  and  make  a  brave  stand; 
but  the  Lord  Denethor  and  all  his  men  cannot  hope  to  do 
what  even  Elrond  said  was  beyond  his  power:  either  to  keep 
the  Burden  secret,  or  to  hold  off  the  full  might  of  the  Enemy 
when  he  comes  to  take  it.  Which  way  would  any  of  us  choose 
in  Frodo’s  place?  I  do  not  know.  Now  indeed  we  miss 
Gandalf  most.’ 

‘Grievous  is  our  loss,’  said  Legolas.  ‘Yet  we  must  needs 
make  up  our  minds  without  his  aid.  Why  cannot  we  decide, 
and  so  help  Frodo?  Let  us  call  him  back  and  then  vote!  I 
should  vote  for  Minas  Tirith.’ 

‘And  so  should  I,’  said  Gimli.  We,  of  course,  were  only 
sent  to  help  the  Bearer  along  the  road,  to  go  no  further  than 
we  wished;  and  none  of  us  is  under  any  oath  or  command  to 
seek  Mount  Doom.  Flard  was  my  parting  from  Lothlorien. 
Yet  I  have  come  so  far,  and  I  say  this:  now  we  have  reached 
the  last  choice,  it  is  clear  to  me  that  I  cannot  leave  Frodo.  I 
would  choose  Minas  Tirith,  but  if  he  does  not,  then  I  follow 
him.’ 

‘And  I  too  will  go  with  him,’  said  Legolas.  ‘It  would  be 
faithless  now  to  say  farewell.’ 

‘It  would  indeed  be  a  betrayal,  if  we  all  left  him,’  said 
Aragorn.  ‘But  if  he  goes  east,  then  all  need  not  go  with  him; 
nor  do  I  think  that  all  should.  That  venture  is  desperate:  as 
much  so  for  eight  as  for  three  or  two,  or  one  alone.  If  you 
would  let  me  choose,  then  I  should  appoint  three  com¬ 
panions:  Sam,  who  could  not  bear  it  otherwise;  and  Gimli; 
and  myself.  Boromir  will  return  to  his  own  city,  where  his 
father  and  his  people  need  him;  and  with  him  the  others 
should  go,  or  at  least  Meriadoc  and  Peregrin,  if  Legolas  is 
not  willing  to  leave  us.’ 

‘That  won’t  do  at  all!’  cried  Merry.  ‘We  can’t  leave  Frodo! 
Pippin  and  I  always  intended  to  go  wherever  he  went,  and 
we  still  do.  But  we  did  not  realize  what  that  would  mean.  It 


526 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


seemed  different  so  far  away,  in  the  Shire  or  in  Rivendell.  It 
would  be  mad  and  cruel  to  let  Frodo  go  to  Mordor.  Why 
can’t  we  stop  him?’ 

We  must  stop  him,’  said  Pippin.  ‘And  that  is  what  he  is 
worrying  about,  I  am  sure.  He  knows  we  shan’t  agree  to  his 
going  east.  And  he  doesn’t  like  to  ask  anyone  to  go  with  him, 
poor  old  fellow.  Imagine  it:  going  off  to  Mordor  alone!’ 
Pippin  shuddered.  ‘But  the  dear  silly  old  hobbit,  he  ought  to 
know  that  he  hasn’t  got  to  ask.  He  ought  to  know  that  if  we 
can’t  stop  him,  we  shan’t  leave  him.’ 

‘Begging  your  pardon,’  said  Sam.  ‘I  don’t  think  you  under¬ 
stand  my  master  at  all.  He  isn’t  hesitating  about  which  way 
to  go.  Of  course  not!  What’s  the  good  of  Minas  Tirith 
anyway?  To  him,  I  mean,  begging  your  pardon,  Master 
Boromir,’  he  added,  and  turned.  It  was  then  that  they  dis¬ 
covered  that  Boromir,  who  at  first  had  been  sitting  silent  on 
the  outside  of  the  circle,  was  no  longer  there. 

‘Now  where’s  he  got  to?’  cried  Sam,  looking  worried.  ‘He’s 
been  a  bit  queer  lately,  to  my  mind.  But  anyway  he’s  not  in 
this  business.  He’s  off  to  his  home,  as  he  always  said;  and  no 
blame  to  him.  But  Mr.  Frodo,  he  knows  he’s  got  to  find  the 
Cracks  of  Doom,  if  he  can.  But  he’s  afraid.  Now  it’s  come  to 
the  point,  he’s  just  plain  terrified.  That’s  what  his  trouble  is. 
Of  course  he’s  had  a  bit  of  schooling,  so  to  speak  -  we  all 
have  -  since  we  left  home,  or  he’d  be  so  terrified  he’d  just  fling 
the  Ring  in  the  River  and  bolt.  But  he’s  still  too  frightened  to 
start.  And  he  isn’t  worrying  about  us  either:  whether  we’ll  go 
along  with  him  or  no.  He  knows  we  mean  to.  That’s  another 
thing  that’s  bothering  him.  If  he  screws  himself  up  to  go,  he’ll 
want  to  go  alone.  Mark  my  words!  We’re  going  to  have 
trouble  when  he  comes  back.  For  he’ll  screw  himself  up  all 
right,  as  sure  as  his  name’s  Baggins.’ 

‘I  believe  you  speak  more  wisely  than  any  of  us,  Sam,’  said 
Aragorn.  ‘And  what  shall  we  do,  if  you  prove  right?’ 

‘Stop  him!  Don’t  let  him  go!’  cried  Pippin. 

‘I  wonder?’  said  Aragorn.  ‘He  is  the  Bearer,  and  the  fate 
of  the  Burden  is  on  him.  I  do  not  think  that  it  is  our  part  to 


THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  FELLOWSHIP  527 

drive  him  one  way  or  the  other.  Nor  do  I  think  that  we  should 
succeed,  if  we  tried.  There  are  other  powers  at  work  far 
stronger.’ 

‘Well,  I  wish  Frodo  would  “screw  himself  up”  and  come 
back,  and  let  us  get  it  over,’  said  Pippin.  ‘This  waiting  is 
horrible!  Surely  the  time  is  up?’ 

‘Yes,’  said  Aragorn.  ‘The  hour  is  long  passed.  The  morning 
is  wearing  away.  We  must  call  for  him.’ 

At  that  moment  Boromir  reappeared.  He  came  out  from 
the  trees  and  walked  towards  them  without  speaking.  His  face 
looked  grim  and  sad.  He  paused  as  if  counting  those  that 
were  present,  and  then  sat  down  aloof,  with  his  eyes  on  the 
ground. 

Where  have  you  been,  Boromir?’  asked  Aragorn.  ‘Have 
you  seen  Frodo?’ 

Boromir  hesitated  for  a  second.  ‘Yes,  and  no,’  he  answered 
slowly.  ‘Yes:  I  found  him  some  way  up  the  hill,  and  I  spoke 
to  him.  I  urged  him  to  come  to  Minas  Tirith  and  not  to  go 
east.  I  grew  angry  and  he  left  me.  He  vanished.  I  have  never 
seen  such  a  thing  happen  before,  though  I  have  heard  of  it 
in  tales.  He  must  have  put  the  Ring  on.  I  could  not  find  him 
again.  I  thought  he  would  return  to  you.’ 

‘Is  that  all  that  you  have  to  say?’  said  Aragorn,  looking  hard 
and  not  too  kindly  at  Boromir. 

‘Yes,’  he  answered.  ‘I  will  say  no  more  yet.’ 

‘This  is  bad!’  cried  Sam,  jumping  up.  ‘I  don’t  know  what 
this  Man  has  been  up  to.  Why  should  Mr.  Frodo  put  the 
thing  on?  He  didn’t  ought  to  have;  and  if  he  has,  goodness 
knows  what  may  have  happened!’ 

‘But  he  wouldn’t  keep  it  on,’  said  Merry.  ‘Not  when  he 
had  escaped  the  unwelcome  visitor,  like  Bilbo  used  to.’ 

‘But  where  did  he  go?  Where  is  he?’  cried  Pippin.  ‘He’s 
been  away  ages  now.’ 

‘How  long  is  it  since  you  saw  Frodo  last,  Boromir?’  asked 
Aragorn. 

‘Half  an  hour,  maybe,’  he  answered.  ‘Or  it  might  be  an 


528 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


hour.  I  have  wandered  for  some  time  since.  I  do  not  know!  I 
do  not  know!’  He  put  his  head  in  his  hands,  and  sat  as  if 
bowed  with  grief. 

‘An  hour  since  he  vanished!’  shouted  Sam.  ‘We  must  try 
and  find  him  at  once.  Come  on!’ 

‘Wait  a  moment!’  cried  Aragorn.  ‘We  must  divide  up  into 
pairs,  and  arrange  -  here,  hold  on!  Wait!’ 

It  was  no  good.  They  took  no  notice  of  him.  Sam  had 
dashed  off  first.  Merry  and  Pippin  had  followed,  and  were 
already  disappearing  westward  into  the  trees  by  the  shore, 
shouting:  Frodo!  Frodo!  in  their  clear,  high,  hobbit-voices. 
Legolas  and  Gimli  were  running.  A  sudden  panic  or  madness 
seemed  to  have  fallen  on  the  Company. 

‘We  shall  all  be  scattered  and  lost,’  groaned  Aragorn.  ‘Boro- 
mir!  I  do  not  know  what  part  you  have  played  in  this  mischief, 
but  help  now!  Go  after  those  two  young  hobbits,  and  guard 
them  at  the  least,  even  if  you  cannot  find  Frodo.  Come  back 
to  this  spot,  if  you  find  him,  or  any  traces  of  him.  I  shall 
return  soon.’ 

Aragorn  sprang  swiftly  away  and  went  in  pursuit  of  Sam. 
Just  as  he  reached  the  little  lawn  among  the  rowans  he  over¬ 
took  him,  toiling  uphill,  panting  and  calling,  Frodo! 

‘Come  with  me,  Sam!’  he  said.  ‘None  of  us  should  be 
alone.  There  is  mischief  about.  I  feel  it.  I  am  going  to  the 
top,  to  the  Seat  of  Amon  Hen,  to  see  what  may  be  seen.  And 
look!  It  is  as  my  heart  guessed,  Frodo  went  this  way.  Follow 
me,  and  keep  your  eyes  open!’  He  sped  up  the  path. 

Sam  did  his  best,  but  he  could  not  keep  up  with  Strider 
the  Ranger,  and  soon  fell  behind.  He  had  not  gone  far  before 
Aragorn  was  out  of  sight  ahead.  Sam  stopped  and  puffed. 
Suddenly  he  clapped  his  hand  to  his  head. 

‘Whoa,  Sam  Gamgee!’  he  said  aloud.  ‘Your  legs  are  too 
short,  so  use  your  head!  Let  me  see  now!  Boromir  isn’t  lying, 
that’s  not  his  way;  but  he  hasn’t  told  us  everything.  Some¬ 
thing  scared  Mr.  Frodo  badly.  He  screwed  himself  up  to  the 
point,  sudden.  He  made  up  his  mind  at  last  -  to  go.  Where 


THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  FELLOWSHIP  529 

to?  Off  East.  Not  without  Sam?  Yes,  without  even  his  Sam. 
That’s  hard,  cruel  hard.’ 

Sam  passed  his  hand  over  his  eyes,  brushing  away  the 
tears.  ‘Steady,  Gamgee!’  he  said.  ‘Think,  if  you  can!  He  can’t 
fly  across  rivers,  and  he  can’t  jump  waterfalls.  He’s  got  no 
gear.  So  he’s  got  to  get  back  to  the  boats.  Back  to  the  boats! 
Back  to  the  boats,  Sam,  like  lightning!’ 

Sam  turned  and  bolted  back  down  the  path.  He  fell  and 
cut  his  knees.  Up  he  got  and  ran  on.  He  came  to  the  edge  of 
the  lawn  of  Parth  Galen  by  the  shore,  where  the  boats  were 
drawn  up  out  of  the  water.  No  one  was  there.  There  seemed 
to  be  cries  in  the  woods  behind,  but  he  did  not  heed  them. 
He  stood  gazing  for  a  moment,  stock-still,  gaping.  A  boat 
was  sliding  down  the  bank  all  by  itself.  With  a  shout  Sam 
raced  across  the  grass.  The  boat  slipped  into  the  water. 

‘Coming,  Mr.  Frodo!  Coming!’  called  Sam,  and  flung  him¬ 
self  from  the  bank,  clutching  at  the  departing  boat.  He  missed 
it  by  a  yard.  With  a  cry  and  a  splash  he  fell  face  downward 
into  deep  swift  water.  Gurgling  he  went  under,  and  the  River 
closed  over  his  curly  head. 

An  exclamation  of  dismay  came  from  the  empty  boat.  A 
paddle  swirled  and  the  boat  put  about.  Frodo  was  just  in 
time  to  grasp  Sam  by  the  hair  as  he  came  up,  bubbling  and 
struggling.  Fear  was  staring  in  his  round  brown  eyes. 

‘Up  you  come,  Sam  my  lad!’  said  Frodo.  ‘Now  take  my 
hand!’ 

‘Save  me,  Mr.  Frodo!’  gasped  Sam.  ‘I’m  drownded.  I  can’t 
see  your  hand.’ 

‘Here  it  is.  Don’t  pinch,  lad!  I  won’t  let  you  go.  Tread 
water  and  don’t  flounder,  or  you’ll  upset  the  boat.  There 
now,  get  hold  of  the  side,  and  let  me  use  the  paddle!’ 

With  a  few  strokes  Frodo  brought  the  boat  back  to  the 
bank,  and  Sam  was  able  to  scramble  out,  wet  as  a  water-rat. 
Frodo  took  off  the  Ring  and  stepped  ashore  again. 

‘Of  all  the  confounded  nuisances  you  are  the  worst,  Sam!’ 
he  said. 

‘Oh,  Mr.  Frodo,  that’s  hard!’  said  Sam  shivering.  ‘That’s 


530 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 


hard,  trying  to  go  without  me  and  all.  If  I  hadn’t  a  guessed 
right,  where  would  you  be  now?’ 

‘Safely  on  my  way.’ 

‘Safely!’  said  Sam.  ‘All  alone  and  without  me  to  help  you? 
I  couldn’t  have  a  borne  it,  it’d  have  been  the  death  of  me.’ 

‘It  would  be  the  death  of  you  to  come  with  me,  Sam,’  said 
Frodo,  ‘and  I  could  not  have  borne  that.’ 

‘Not  as  certain  as  being  left  behind,’  said  Sam. 

‘But  I  am  going  to  Mordor.’ 

‘I  know  that  well  enough,  Mr.  Frodo.  Of  course  you  are. 
And  I’m  coming  with  you.’ 

‘Now,  Sam,’  said  Frodo,  ‘don’t  hinder  me!  The  others  will 
be  coming  back  at  any  minute.  If  they  catch  me  here,  I  shall 
have  to  argue  and  explain,  and  I  shall  never  have  the  heart 
or  the  chance  to  get  off.  But  I  must  go  at  once.  It’s  the  only 
way.’ 

‘Of  course  it  is,’  answered  Sam.  ‘But  not  alone.  I’m  coming 
too,  or  neither  of  us  isn’t  going.  I’ll  knock  holes  in  all  the 
boats  first.’ 

Frodo  actually  laughed.  A  sudden  warmth  and  gladness 
touched  his  heart.  ‘Leave  one!’  he  said.  ‘We’ll  need  it.  But  you 
can’t  come  like  this  without  your  gear  or  food  or  anything.’ 

This is a story of long ago. At that time the languages and letters were 
quite different from ours of today. English is used to represent the 
languages. But two points may be noted, (i) In English the only correct 
plural of dzoarf is dwarfs, and the adjective is dwarfish. In this story 
dwarves and dwarvish are used*, but only when speal^g of the ancient 
people to whom Thorin Oakenshield and his companions belonged. 
(2) Ore is not an English word. It occurs in one or two places but is 
usually translated goblin (or hobgoblin for the larger kinds). Ore is the 
hobbits* form of the name given at that time to these creatures, and it 
is not connected at all with our ore, ork, applied to sea-animals of 
dolphin-kind. 

Runes were old letters originally used for cutting or scratching on 
wood, stone, or metal, and so were thin and angular. At the time of this 
tale only the Dwarves made regular use of them, especially for private 
or secret records. Their runes arc in this‘book represented by English 
runes, which are known now to few people. If the runes on Thror’s 
Map are compared with the transcriptions into modern letters (on pp. 
30 and 63), the alphabet, adapted to modem English, can be discovered 
and the above runic title also read. On the Map all the normal runes 
are found, except y for X. I and U arc used for J and V. There was no 
rune for Q (use GW); nor for Z (the dwarf-rune A may be used if 
required). It will be found, however, that some single runes stand for 
two modem letters: th, ng, ee; other runes of the same kind ('t' ea 
and bO St) were also sometimes used. The secret door was marked 
dm. From the side a hand pointed to this, and under it was written: 

The last two runes are the initials of Thror and Thrain. 

The moon-runes read by Elrond were: 

i*irr •m-KMRtMPrM. 

On the Map the compass points are marked in runes, with East at the 
top, as usual in dwarf-maps, and so read clockwise: £(ast), S(outh), 
W(est), N(orth). 

* The reason for this use is given in The Lord if the Rings, III 4x5* 




I An unexpected party 

In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit. Not a nasty, 
dirty, wet hole, filled with the ends ('f worms and an oozy 
smell, nor yet a dry, bare, sandy hole with nothing in it to 
sit down on or to eat: it was a hobbit-hole, and that 
means comfort. 

It had a perfectly round door like a porthole, painted 
green, with a shiny yellow brass knob in the exact 
middle. The door opened on to a tube-shaped hall like a 
tunnel: a very comfortable tunnel without smoke, with 
panelled walls, and floors tiled and carpeted, provided 
with polished chairs, and lots and lots of pegs for hats 
and coats - the hobbit was fond of visitors. The tunnel 
wound on and on, going fairly but not quite straight into 
the side of the hill - The Hill, as all the people for many 
miles round called it - and many little round doors 
opened out of it, first on one side and then on another. 
No going upstairs for the hobbit: bedrooms, bathrooms, 
cellars, pantries (lots of these), wardrobes (he had whole 
rooms devoted to clothes), kitchens, dining-rooms, all 
were on the same floor, and indeed on the same passage. 
The best rooms were all on the lefthand side (going in), 
for these were the only ones to have windows, deep-set 
round windows looking over his garden, and meadows 
beyond, sloping down to the river. 

This hobbit was a very well-to-do hobbit, and his name 
was Baggins. The Bagginses had lived in the neighbour¬ 
hood of The Hill for time out of mind, and people con¬ 
sidered them very respectable, not only because most of 
them were rich, but also because they never had any 
adventures or did anything unexpected: you could tell 

1 



THE HOBBIT 


what a Baggins would say on any question without the 
bother of asking him. This is a story of how a Baggins 
had an adventure, and found himself doing and saying 
things altogether unexpected. He may have lost the 
neighbours’ respect, but he gained - well, you will see 
whether he gained anything in the end. 

The mother of our particular hobbit - what is a 
hobbit? I suppose hobbits need some description now¬ 
adays, since they have become rare and shy of the Big 
People, as they call us. They are (or were) a little people, 
about half our height, and smaller than the bearded 
Dwarves. Hobbits have no beards. There is little or no 
magic about them, except the ordinary everyday sort 
which helps them to disappear quietly and quickly when 
large stupid folk like you and me come blundering along, 
making a noise like elephants which they can hear a mile 
off. They are inclined to be fat in the stomach; they dress 
in bright colours (chiefly green and yellow); wear no 
shoes, because their feet grow natural leathery soles and 
thick warm brown hair like the stuff on their heads 
(which is curly); have long clever brown fingers, good- 
natured faces, and laugh deep fruity laughs (especially 
after dinner, which they have twice a day when they can 
get it). Now you know enough to go on with. As I was 
saying, the mother of this hobbit - of Bilbo Baggins, that 
is - was the famous Belladonna Took, one of the three 
remarkable daughters of the Old Took, head of the 
hobbits who lived across The Water, the small river that 
ran at the foot of The Hill. It was often said (in other 
families) that long ago one of the Took ancestors must 
have taken a fairy wife. That was, of course, absurd, but 
certainly there was still something not entirely hobbit¬ 
like about them, and once in a while members of the 
Took-clan would go and have adventures. They dis¬ 
creetly disappeared, and the family hushed it up? but 
the fact remained that the Tooks were not as respectable 
as the Bagginses, though they were undoubtedly richer. 

2 



AN UNEXPECTED PARTY 

Not that Belladonna Took ever had any adventures 
after she became Mrs. Bungo Baggins. Bungo, that was 
Bilbo's father, built the most luxurious hobbit-hole for 
her (and partly with her money) that was to be found 
either under The Hill or over Th^' Hill or across The 
Water, and there they remained to ihe end of their days.^ 
Still it is probable that Bilbo, her ( nly son, although he 
looked and behaved exactly like a second edition of his 
solid and comfortable father, got something a bit queer 
in his make-up from the Took side, something that only 
waited for a chance to come out. The chance never 
arrived, until Bilbo Baggins was grown up, being about 
fifty years old or so, and living in the beautiful hobbit- 
hole built by his father, which I have just described for 
you, until he had in fact apparently settled down im¬ 
movably. 

By some curious chance one morning long ago in the 
quiet of the world, when there was less noise and more 
green, and the hobbits were still numerous and pros¬ 
perous, and Bilbo Baggins was standing at his door after 
breakfast smoking an enormous long wooden pipe that 
reached nearly down to his woolly toes (neatly brushed) - 
Gandalf came by. Gandalf! If you had heard only a 
quarter of what I have heard about him, and I have only 
heard very little of all there is to hear, you would be 
prepared for any sort of remarkable tale. Tales and 
adventures sprouted up all over the place wherever he 
went, in the most extraordinary fashion. He had not been 
down that way under The Hill for ages and ages, not 
since his friend the Old Took died, in fact, and the 
hobbits had almost forgotten what he looked like. He 
had been away over The Hill and across The Water on 
businesses of his own since they were all small hobbit- 
boys and hobbit-girls. 

All that the unsuspecting Bilbo saw that morning was 
an old man with a staff. He had a tall pointed blue hat, a 
long grey cloak, a silver scarf over which his long white 

3 



THE HOBBIT 


beard hung down below his waist, and immense black 
boots. 

‘Good Morning I * said Bilbo, and he meant it. The sun 
was shining, and the grass was very green. But Gandalf 
looked at him from under long bushy eyebrows that stuck 
put further than the brim of his shady hat. 

‘What do you mean?* he said. ‘Do you wish me a good 
morning, or mean that it is a good morning whether I 
want it or not; or that you feel good this morning; or that 
it is a morning to be good on?* 

‘All of them at once,* said Bilbo. ‘And a very fine morn¬ 
ing for a pipe of tobacco out of doors, into the bargain. If 
you have a pipe about you, sit down and have a fill of 
mine! There*s no hurry, we have all the day before us! * 
Then Bilbo sat down on a seat by his door, crossed his 
legs, and blew out a beautiful grey ring of smoke that 
sailed up into the air without breaking and floated away 
over The Hill. 

‘Very pretty!* said Gandalf. ‘But I have no time to 
blow smoke-rings this morning. I am looking for someone 
to share in an adventure that I am arranging, and it*s 
very difficult to find anyone.* 

‘I should think so - in these parts! We are plain quiet 
folk and have no use for adventures. Nasty disturbing 
uncomfortable things! Make you late for dinner! I can*t 
think what anybody sees in them,* said our Mr. Baggins, 
and stuck one thumb behind his braces, and blew out 
another even bigger smoke-ring. Then he took out his 
morning letters, and began to read, pretending to take no 
more notice of the old man. He had decided that he was 
not quite his sort, and wanted him to go away. But the 
old man did not move. He stood leaning on his stick 
and gazing at the hobbit without saying anything, 
till Bilbo got quite uncomfortable and even a little 
cross. 

‘Good morning!’ he said at last. *We don*t want any 
adventures here, thank you! You might try over The 

4 



AN UNEXPECTED PARTY 

Hill or across The Water/ By this he meant that the con¬ 
versation was at an end. 

‘What a lot of things you do use Good morning for!’ 
said Gandalf. ‘Now you mean that y^ »u want to get rid of 
me, and that it won’t be good till I move off.’ 

‘Not at all, not at all, my dear sir' Let me see, I don’t 
think I know your name?* 

‘Yes, yes, my dear sir! - and I do know your name, Mr. 
Bilbo Baggins. And you do know my name, though you 
don’t remember that I belong to it I am Gandalf, and 
Gandalf means me! To think that I should have lived to 
be good-morninged by Belladonna Took’s son, as if I 
was selling buttons at the door!’ 

‘Gandalf, Gandalf! Good gracious me! Not the 
wandering wizard that gave Old Took a pair of magic 
diamond studs that fastened themselves and never came 
undone till ordered? Not the fellow who used to tell such 
wonderful tales at parties, about dragons and goblins and 
giants and the rescue of princesses and the unexpected 
luck of widows’ sons? Not the man that used to make 
such particularly excellent fireworks! I remember those! 
Old Took used to have them on Midsummer’s Eve. 
Splendid! They used to go up like great lilies and snap¬ 
dragons and laburnums of fire and hang in the twilight 
all evening!’ You will notice already that Mr. Baggins 
was not quite so prosy as he liked to believe, also that he 
was very fond of flowers. ‘Dear me! ’ he went on. ‘Not the 
Gandalf who was responsible for so many quiet lads and 
lasses going off into the Blue for mad adventures? Any¬ 
thing from climbing trees to visiting Elves - or sailing in 
ships, sailing to other shores! Bless me, life used to be 
quite inter— I mean, you used to upset things badly in 
these parts once upon a time. I beg your pardon, but I 
had no idea you were still in business.* 

‘Where else should I be?* said the wizard. ‘All the same 
I am pleased to find you remember something about me. 
You seem to remember my fireworks kindly, at any rate, 

5 



THE HOBBIT 


and that is not without hope. Indeed for your old grand- 
father Took’s sake, and for the sake of poor Belladonna, I 
will give you what you asked for.* 

*I beg your pardon, I haven’t asked for anything!* 
‘Yes, you have! Twice now. My pardon. I give it you. 
,In fact I will go so far as to send you on this adventure. 
Very amusing for me, very good for you - and profitable 
too, very likely, if you ever get over it.* 

‘Sorry! I don*t want any adventures, thank you. Not 
today. Good morning! But please come to tea - any time 
you like! Why not tomorrow? Come tomorrow! Good 
bye! * With that the hobbit turned and scuttled inside his 
round green door, and shut it as quickly as he dared, not 
to seem rude. Wizards after all are wizards. 

‘What on earth did I ask him to tea for!* he said to 
himself, as he went to the pantry. He had only just had 
breakfast, but he thought a cake or two and a drink of 
something would do him good after his fright. 

Gandalf in the meantime was still standing outside the 
door, and laughing long but quietly. After a while he 
stepped up, and with the spike on his staff scratched a 
queer sign on the hobbit’s beautiful green front-door. 
Then he strode away, just about the time when Bilbo was 
finishing his second cake and beginning to think that he 
had escaped adventures very well. 

The next day he had almost forgotten about Gandalf. 
He did not remember things very well, unless he put 
them down on his Engagement Tablet: like this: 
Gandalf Tea Wednesday, Yesterday he had been too 
flustered to do anything of the kind. 

Just before tea-time there came a tremendous ring on 
the front-door bell, and then he remembered! He rushed 
and put on the kettle, and put out another cup and 
saucer, and an extra cake or two, and ran to the 
door. 

‘I am so sorry to keep you waiting!* he was going to 
say, when he saw that it was not Gandalf at all. It was a 

6 



AN UNEXPECTED P\RTY 

dwarf with a blue beard tucked into a golden belt, and 
very bright eyes under his dark-gre en hood. As soon as 
the door was opened, he pushed inside, just as if he had 
been expected. 

He hung his hooded cloak on the nearest peg, and 
*Dwalin at your service!* he said u th a low bow. 

‘Bilbo Baggins at yours! * said the hobbit, too surprised 
to ask any questions for the moment. When the silence 
that followed had become uncomfortable, he added : ‘I 
am just about to take tea; pray come and have some with 
me.* A little stiff perhaps, but he meant it kindly. And 
what would you do, if an uninvited dwarf came and 
hung his things up in your hall without a word of 
explanation? 

They had not been at table long, in fact they had 
hardly reached the third cake, when there came another 
even louder ring at the bell. 

‘Excuse me!* said the hobbit, and off he went to the 
door. 

‘So you have got here at last! * That was what he was 
going to say to Gandalf this time. But it was not Gandalf. 
Instead there was a very old-looking dwarf on the step 
with a white beard and a scarlet hood; and he too 
hopped inside as soon as the door was open, just as if he 
had been invited. 

‘I see they have begun to arrive already,* he said when 
he caught sight of Dwalin*s green hood hanging up. He 
hung his red one next to it, and ‘Balin at your service! * 
he said with his hand on his breast. 

‘Thank you 1 ’ said Bilbo with a gasp. It was not the 
correct thing to say, but they have begun to arrive had 
flustered him badly. He liked visitors, but he liked to 
know them before they arrived, and he preferred to ask 
them himself. He had a horrible thought that the cakes 
might run short, and then he - as the host: he knew his 
duty and stuck to it however painful - he might have to 
go without. 


7 



THE HOBBIT 


‘Come along in, and have some tea! ’ he managed to say 
after taking a deep breath. 

‘A little beer would suit me better, if it is all the same 
to you, my good sir,* said Balin with the white beard. 
‘But I don't mind some cake - seed-cake, if you have any.* 

‘Lots! * Bilbo found himself answering, to his own sur¬ 
prise; and he found himself scuttling off, too, to the cellar 
to fill a pint beer-mug, and then to a pantry to fetch two 
beautiful round seed-cakes which he had baked that 
afternoon for his after-supper morsel. 

When he got back Balin and Dwalin were talking at 
the table like old friends (as a matter of fact they were 
brothers). Bilbo plumped down the beer and the cake in 
front of them, when loud came a ring at the bell again, 
and then another ring. 

‘Gandalf for certain this time,’ he thought as he puffed 
along the passage. But it was not. It was two more 
dwarves, both with blue hoods, silver belts, and yellow 
beards; and each of them carried a bag of tools and a 
spade. In they hopped, as soon as the door began to open 
" Bilbo was hardly surprised at all. 

‘What can I do for you, my dwarves?* he said. 

‘Kili at your service!’ said the one. ‘And Fili!* added 
the other; and they both swept off their blue hoods and 
bowed. 

‘At yours and your family’s! * replied Bilbo, remember¬ 
ing his manners this time. 

‘Dwalin and Balin here already, I see,* said Kili. ‘Let us 
join the throng!* 

‘Throng! * thought Mr. Baggins. ‘I don’t like the sound 
of that. I really must sit down for a minute and collect 
my wits, and have a drink.’ He had only just had a sip - 
in the corner, while the four dwarves sat round the table, 
and talked about mines and gold and troubles with the 
goblins, and the depredations of dragons, and lots of 
other things which he did not understand, and did not 
want to, for they sounded much too adventurous - when, 

8 



AN UNEXPECTED PVRTY 

ding-dong-a^ling-’dang, his bell rang again, as if some 
naughty little hobbit-boy was trying to pull the handle 
off. 

‘Someone at the door!* he said, blinking. 

‘Some four, I should say by the >ound,’ said Fili. ‘Be¬ 
sides, we saw them coming along behind us in the dis¬ 
tance.* 

The poor little hobbit sat down in the hall and put his 
head in his hands, and wondered what had happened, 
and what was going to happen, and whether they would 
all stay to supper. Then the bell rang again louder than 
ever, and he had to run to the door. It was not four after 
all, it was five. Another dwarf had come along while he 
was wondering in the hall. He had hardly turned the 
knob, before they were all inside, bowing and saying ‘at 
your service’ one after another. Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, and 
Gloin were their names; and very soon two purple hoods, 
a grey hood, a brown hood, and a white hood were hang¬ 
ing on the pegs, and off they marched with their broad 
hands stuck in their gold and silver belts to join the 
others. Already it had almost become a throng. Some 
called for ale, and some for porter, and one for coffee, and 
all of them for cakes; so the hobbit was kept very busy for 
a while. 

A big jug of coffee had just been set in the hearth, the 
seed-cakes were gone, and the dwarves were starting on a 
round of buttered scones, when there came - a loud 
knock. Not a ring, but a hard rat-tat on the hobbit*s 
beautiful green door. Somebody was banging with a 
stick! 

Bilbo rushed along the passage, very angry, and alto¬ 
gether bewildered and bewuthered - this was the most 
awkward Wednesday he ever remembered. He pulled 
open the door with a jerk, and they all fell in, one on top 
of the other. More dwarves, four more! And there was 
Gandalf behind, leaning on his staff and laughing. He 
had made quite a dent on the beautiful door; he had 

9 



THE HOBBIT 


also, by the way, knocked out the secret mark that he had 
put there the morning before. 

‘Carefully I Carefully I' he said. ‘It is not like you. 
Bilbo, to keep friends waiting on the mat, and then open 
the door like a pop-gun I Let me introduce Bifur, Bofur, 
Bombur, and especially Thorin I * 

‘At your service I * said Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur 
standing in a row. Then they hung up two yellow hoods 
and a pale green one; and also a sky-blue one with a long 
silver tassel. This last belonged to Thorin, an enormously 
important dwarf, in fact no other than the great Thorin 
Oakenshield himself, who was not at all pleased at falling 
fiat on Bilbo’s mat with Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur on top 
of him. For one thing Bombur was immensely fat and 
heavy. Thorin indeed was very haughty, and said noth¬ 
ing about service; but poor Mr. Baggins said he was 
sorry so many times, that at last he grunted ‘pray don’t 
mention it,’ and stopped frowning. 

‘Now we are all here! ’ said Gandalf, looking at the row 
of thirteen hoods - the best detachable party hoods - and 
his own hat hanging on the pegs. ‘Quite a merry gather¬ 
ing! I hope there is something left for the late comers to 
eat and drink! What’s that? Tea! No thank you! A 
little red wine, I think for me.’ 

‘And for me,’ said Thorin. 

‘And raspberry jam and apple-tart,' said Bifur. 

‘And mince-pies and cheese,’ said Bofur. 

‘And pork-pie and salad,’ said Bombur. 

‘And more cakes - and ale - and coffee, if you don’t 
mind,’ called the other dwarves through the door. 

‘Put on a few eggs, there’s a good fellow!’ Gandalf 
called after him, as the hobbit stumped off to the pan- 
tries. ‘And just bring out the cold chicken and pickles! ’ 

‘Seems to know as much about the inside of my larders 
as I do myself!’ thought Mr. Baggins, who was feeling 
positively flummoxed, and was beginning to wonder 
whether a most wretched adventure had not come right 

lO 



AN UNEXPECTED PARTY 

into his house. By the time he had got all the bottles and 
dishes and knives and forks and glasses and plates and 
spoons and things piled up on big trays, he was getting 
very hot, and red in the face, and annoyed. 

‘Confusticate and bebother thes*' dwarves I* he said 
aloud. ‘Why don’t they come and le nd a hand?’ Lo and 
behold! There stood Balin and Dwaiin at the door of the 
kitchen, and Fili and Kili behind them, and before he 
could say knife they had whisked the trays and a couple 
of small tables into the parlour and set out everything 
afresh. 

Gandalf sat at the head of the party with the thirteen 
dwarves all round: and Bilbo sat on a stool at the fire¬ 
side, nibbling at a biscuit (his appetite was quite taken 
away), and trying to look as if this was all perfectly 
ordinary and not in the least an adventure. The dwarves 
ate and ate, and talked and talked, and time got on. At 
last they pushed their chairs back, and Bilbo made a 
move to collect the plates and glasses. 

1 suppose you will all stay to supper?’ he said in his 
politest unpressing tones. 

‘Of course!’ said Thorin. ‘And after. We shan’t get 
through the business till late, and we must have some 
music first. Now to clear up!’ 

Thereupon the twelve dwarves - not Thorin, he was 
too important, and stayed talking to Gandalf - jumped 
to their feet, and made tall piles of all the things. Oft they 
went, not waiting for trays, balancing columns of plates, 
each with a bottle on the top, with one hand, while the 
hobbit ran after them almost squeaking with fright: 
‘Please be careful!' and ‘please, don’t trouble! I can 
manage.’ But the dwarves only started to sing: 

Chip the glasses and crack the plates! 

Blunt the knives and bend the forks! 

That *5 ivhat Bilbo Baggins hates - 
Smash the bottles and burn the corks! 


11 



THE HOBBIT 


Cut the cloth and tread on the fat! 

Pour milk on the pantry floor! 

Leave the bones on the bedroom mat\ 

Splash the wine on every door! 

Dump the crocks in a boiling bowl; 

Pound them up luith a thumping pole; 

And when you've finished, if any are whole, 
Send them down the hall to roll! 

That's what Bilbo Baggins hates! 

So, carefully! carefully with the plates! 

And of course they did none of these dreadful things, 
and everything was cleaned and put away safe as quick as 
lightning, while the hobbit was turning round and round 
in the middle of the kitchen trying to see what they were 
doing. Then they went back, and found Thorin with his 
feet on the fender smoking a pipe. He was blowing the 
most enormous smoke-rings, and wherever he told one to 
go, it went - up the chimney, or behind the clock on the 
mantelpiece, or under the table, or round and round the 
ceiling; but wherever it went it was not quick enough to 
escape Gandalf. Pop! he sent a smaller smoke-ring from 
his short clay-pipe straight through each one of Thorin's. 
Then Gandalf’s smoke-ring would go green and come 
back to hover over the wizard's head. He had a cloud of 
them about him already, and in the dim light it made 
him look strange and sorcerous. Bilbo stood still and 
watched - he loved smoke-rings - and then he blushed to 
think how proud he had been yesterday morning of the 
smoke-rings he had sent up the wind over The Hill. 

‘Now for some music 1 ’ said Thorin. ‘Bring out the 
instruments!' 

Kili and Fili rushed for their bags and brought back 
little fiddles; Dori, Nori, and Ori brought out flutes from 
somewhere inside their coats; Bombur produced a drum 



AN UNEXPECTED PARTY 

from the hall: Bifur and Bofur went out too, and came 
back with clarinets that they had lefr among the walking- 
kicks. Dwalin and Balin said: ‘Excuse me, I left mine in 
the porch! ’ ‘Just bring mine in witli you!' said Thorin. 
They came back with viols as big as themselves, and with 
Thorin’s harp wrapped in a green cloth. It was a beauti¬ 
ful golden harp, and when Thorin struck it the music 
began all at once, so sudden and sw(‘et that Bilbo forgot 
everything else, and was swept avvay into dark lands 
under strange moons, far over The Water and very far 
from his hobbit-hole under The Hill. 

The dark came into the room from the little window 
that opened in the side of The Hill: the firelight flickered 
- it was April - and still they played on, while the 
shadow of Gandalfs beard wagged against the wall. 

The dark filled all the room, and the fire died down, 
and the shadows were lost, and still they played on. And 
suddenly first one and then another began to sing as they 
played, deep-throated singing of the dwarves in the deep 
places of their ancient homes; and this is like a fragment 
of their song, if it can be like their song without their 
music. 

Far over the misty mountains cold 
To dungeons deep and caverns old 
We must away ere break of day 
To seek the pale enchanted gold. 

The dwarves of yore made mighty spells. 
While hammers fell like ringing bells 
In places deep, ivhere dark things sleep, 

In hollow halls beneath the fells. 

For ancient king and elvish lord 
There many a gleaming golden hoard 
They shaped and wrought, and light they 
caught 

To hide in gems on hilt of sword. 

IS 



THE HOBBIT 


On silver necklaces they strung 

The flowering stars, on crowns they hung 

The dragon-fire, in twisted wire 

They meshed the light of moon and sun. 

Far over the misty mountains cold 
To dungeons deep and caverns old 
We must aivay, ere break of day, 

To claim our long-forgotten gold. 

Goblets they carved there for themselves 
And harps of gold: where no man delves 
There lay they long, and many a song 
Was sung unheard by men or elves. 

The pines were roaring on the height, 

The winds were moaning in the night. 

The fire was red, it flaming spread: 

The trees like torches blazed xuith light. 

The bells were ringing in the dale 
And men looked up with faces pale; 

The dragon\s ire more fierce than fire 
Laid low their lowers and houses frail. 

The mountain smoked beneath the moon; 
The dwarves, they heard the tramp of doom. 
They fled their hall to dying fall 
Beneath his feet, beneath the moon. 

Far over the misty mountains grim 
To dungeons deep and caverns dim 
We must away, ere break of day. 

To win our harps and gold from him! 

As they sang the hobbit felt the love of beautiful things 
made by hands and by cunning and by magic moving 

»4 



AN UNEXPECTED PARTY 

through him, a fierce and a jealous L »ve, the desire of the 
hearts of dwarves. Then something Tookish woke up 
inside him, and he wished to go and see the great moun¬ 
tains, and hear the pine-trees and the waterfalls, and ex¬ 
plore the caves, and wear a sword iristead of a walking- 
stick. He looked out of the window. The stars were out in 
a dark sky above the trees. He thought of the jewels of 
the dwarves shining in dark caverns. Suddenly in the 
wood beyond The Water a flame leapt up - probably 
somebody lighting a wood-fire ~ and he thought of 
plundering dragons settling on his quiet Hill and kind¬ 
ling it all to flames. He shuddered; and very quickly he 
was plain Mr. Baggins of Bag-End, Under-Hill, again. 

He got up trembling. He had less than half a mind to 
fetch the lamp, and more than half a mind to pretend to, 
and go and hide behind the beer-barrels in the cellar, 
and not come out again until all the dwarves had gone 
away. Suddenly he found that the music and the singing 
had stopped, and they were all looking at him with eyes 
shining in the dark. 

“Where are you going?* said Thorin, in a tone that 
seemed to show that he guessed both halves of the 
hobbit’s mind. 

‘What about a little light?’ said Bilbo apologetically. 

‘We like dark,' said all the dwarves. ‘Dark for dark 
business! There are many hours before dawn.' 

‘Of course!’ said Bilbo, and sat down in a hurry. He 
missed the stool and sat in the fender, knocking over the 
poker and shovel with a crash. 

‘Hush! ' said Gandalf. ‘Let Thorin speak!' And this is 
how Thorin began. 

‘Gandalf, dwarves and Mr. Baggins! We are met to¬ 
gether in the house of our friend and fellow conspirator, 
this most excellent and audacious hobbit - may the hair 
on his toes never fall out! all praise to his wine and 
ale!—* He paused for breath and for a polite remark 
from the hobbit, but the coihpliments were quite lost on 

15 



THE HOBBIT 


poor Bilbo Baggins, who was wagging his mouth in pro¬ 
test at being called audacious and worst of all fellow con- 
spirator, though no noise came out, he was so flummoxed. 
So Thorin went on: 

‘We are met to discuss our plans, our ways, means, 
policy and devices. We shall soon before the break of day 
start on our long journey, a journey from which some of 
us, or perhaps all of us (except our friend and counsellor, 
the ingenious wizard Gandalf) may never return. It is a 
solemn moment. Our object is, I take it, well known to us 
all. To the estimable Mr. Baggins, and perhaps to one or 
two of the younger dwarves (I think I should be right in 
naming Kili and Fili, for instance), the exact situation at 
the moment may require a little brief explanation—‘ 

This was Thorin’s style. He was an important dwarf. If 
he had been allowed, he would probably have gone on 
like this until he was out of breath, without telling any 
one there anything that was not known already. But he 
was rudely interrupted. Poor Bilbo couldn't bear it any 
longer. At may never return he began to feel a shriek 
coming up inside, and very soon it burst out like the 
whistle of an engine coming out of a tunnel. All the 
dwarves sprang up knocking over the table. Gandalf 
struck a blue light on the end of his magic staff, and in its 
firework glare the poor little hobbit could be seen kneel¬ 
ing on the hearthrug, shaking like a jelly that was melt¬ 
ing. Then he fell flat on the floor, and kept on calling out 
‘struck by lightning, struck by lightning!' over and over 
again; and that was all they could get out of him for a 
long time. So they took him and laid him out of the way 
on the drawing-room sofa with a drink at his elbow, and 
they went back to their dark business. 

‘Excitable little fellow,' said Gandalf, as they sat down 
again. ‘Gets funny queer fits, but he is one of the best, 
one of the best - as fierce as a dragon in a pinch.' 

If you have ever seen a dragon in a pinch, you will 
realize that this was only poetical exaggeration applied to 

i6 



AN UNEXPECTED PARTY 

any hobbit, even to Old Took’s great-granduncle Bull- 
roarer, who was so huge (for a hobbit) that he could rise a 
horse. He charged the ranks of the goblins of Mount 
Gram in the Battle of the Green Fields, and knocked 
their king GolfimbuFs head clean off with a wooden club. 
It sailed a hundred yards through the air and went down 
a rabbit-hole, and in this way the battle was won and the 
game of Golf invented at the same moment. 

In the meanwhile, however, Bullroarer’s gentler de- 
sendant was reviving in the drawing-room. After a while 
and a drink he crept nervously to the door of the parlour. 
This is what he heard, Gloin sj>eaking: ‘Humph!* (or 
some snort more or less like that). ‘Will he do, do you 
think? It is all very well for Gandalf to talk aboujt this 
hobbit being fierce, but one shriek like that in a moment 
of excitement would be enough to wake the dragon and 
all his relatives, and kill the lot of us. I think it sounded 
more like fright than excitement! In fact, if it had not 
been for the sign on the door, I should have been sure we 
had come to the wrong house. As soon as I clapped eyes 
on the little fellow bobbing and puffing on the mat, I had 
my doubts. He looks more like a grocer than a burglar! * 

Then Mr. Baggins turned the handle and went in. The 
Took side had won. He suddenly felt he would go with¬ 
out bed and breakfast to be thought fierce. As for little 
fellow bobbing on the mat it almost made him really 
fierce. Many a time afterwards the Baggins part regretted 
what he did now, and he said to himself: ‘Bilbo, you 
were a fool; you walked right in and put your foot in 
it.’ 

‘Pardon me,’ he said, ‘if I have overheard words that 
you were saying. I don’t pretend to understand what you 
are talking about, or your reference to burglars, but I 
think I am right in believing’ (this is what he called 
being on his dignity) ‘that you think I am no good. I will 
show you. I have no signs on my door - it was painted a 
week ago - and I am quite sure you have come 



THE HOBBIT 


wrong house. As soon as I saw your funny faces on the 
door-step, I had my doubts. But treat it as the right one. 
Tell me what you want done, and I will try it, if I have to 
walk from here to the East of East and fight the wild 
Were-worms in the Last Desert. I had a great-great-great- 
grand-uncle once, Bullroarer Took, and— 

‘Yes, yes, but that was long ago,* said Gloin. ‘I was talk¬ 
ing about you. And I assure you there is A mark on this 
door - the usual one in the trade, or used to be. Burglar 
wants a good job, plenty of Excitement and reasonable 
Reward, that’s how it is usually read. You can say Expert 
Treasure-hunter instead of Burglar if you like. Some of 
them do. It’s all the same to us. Gandalf told us that 
there was a man of the sort in these parts looking for a 
Job at once, and that he had arranged for a meeting here 
this Wednesday tea-time.* 

‘Of course there is a mark,* said Gandalf. ‘I put it there 
myself. For very good reasons. You asked me to find the 
fourteenth man for your expedition, and I chose Mr. 
Baggins. Just let any one say I chose the wrong man or 
the wrong house, and you can stop at thirteen and have 
all the bad luck you like, or go back to digging coal.* 

He scowled so angrily at Gloin that the dwarf huddled 
back in his chair; and when Bilbo tried to open his 
mouth to ask a question, he turned and frowned at him 
and stuck out his bushy eyebrows, till Bilbo shut his 
mouth tight with a snap. ‘That*s right,* said Gandalf. 
‘Let’s have no more argument. I have chosen Mr. Baggins 
and that ought to be enough for all of you. If I say he is a 
Burglar, a Burglar he is, or will be when the time comes. 
There is a lot more in him than you guess, and a deal 
more than he has any idea of himself. You may (possibly) 
all live to thank me yet. Now Bilbo, my boy, fetch the 
lamp, and let’s have a little light on this!* 

On the table in the light of a big lamp with a red shade 
he spread a piece of parchment rather like a map. 

‘This was made by Thror, your grandfather, Thorin, 

i8 



AN UNEXPECTED PARTY 

he said in answer to the dwarves* excited questions. ‘It is 
a plan of the Mountain.* 

‘I don’t see that this will help us much,* said Thorin 
disappointedly after a glance. ‘I remember the Mountain 
well enough and the lands about it. And I know where 
Mirkwood is, and the Withered Heath where the great 
dragons bred.* 

‘There* is a dragon marked in led on the Mountain,* 
said Balin, ‘but it will be easy enough to find him with¬ 
out that, if ever we arrive there.* 

‘There is one point that you haven’t noticed,* said the 
wizard, ‘and that is the secret entrance. You sec that rune 
on the West side, and the hand pointing to it from the 
other runes? That marks a hidden passage to the Lower 
Halls.* (Look at the map at the beginning of this book, 
and you will see there the runes in red.) 

‘It may have been secret once,* said Thorin, ‘but how 
do we know that it is secret any longer? Old Smaug has 
lived there long enough now to find out anything there is 
to know about those caves.* 

‘He may - but he can’t have used it for years and years.’ 

‘Why?* 

‘Because it is too small. “Five feet high the door and 
three may walk abreast** say the runes, but Smaug could 
not creep into a hole that size, not even when he was a 
young dragon, certainly not after devouring so many of 
the dwarves and men of Dale.* 

‘It seems a great big hole to me,* squeaked Bilbo (who 
had no experience of dragons and only of hobbit-holes). 
He was getting excited and interested again, so that he 
forgot to keep his mouth shut. He loved maps, and in his 
hall there hung a large one of the Country Round with 
all his favourite walks marked on it in red ink. ‘How 
could such a large door be kept secret from everybody 
outside, apart from the dragon?* he asked. He was only a 
little hobbit you must remember. 

‘In lots of ways/ said Gandalf. ‘But in what way this 

19 



THE HOBBIT 


one has been hidden we don’t know without going to see. 
From what it says on the map I should guess there is a 
closed door which has been made to look exactly like the 
side of the Mountain. That is the usual dwarves* method 
- I think that is right, isn’t it?* 

‘Quite right,’ said Thorin. 

‘Also,’ went on Gandalf, ‘I forgot to mention that with 
the map went a key, a small and curious key. Here it is! ’ 
he said and handed to Thorin a key with a long barrel 
and intricate words, made of silver. ‘Keep it safe!* 

‘Indeed I will,* said Thorin, and he fastened it upon a 
fine chain that hung about his neck and under his jacket. 
‘Now things begin to look more hopeful. This news alters 
them much for the better. So far we have no clear idea 
what to do. We thought of going East, as quiet and care¬ 
ful as we could, as far as the Long Lake. After that the 
trouble would begin -’ 

‘A long time before that, if I know anything about the 
roads East,* interrupted Gandalf. 

‘We might go from there up along the River Running,’ 
went on Thorin taking no notice, ‘and so to the ruins of 
Dale - the old town in the valley there, under the shadow 
of the Mountain. But we none of us liked the idea of the 
Front Gate. The river runs right out of it through the 
great cliff at the South of the Mountain, and out of it 
comes the dragon too - far too often, unless he has 
changed his habits.’ 

‘That would be no good,’ said the wizard, ‘not without 
a mighty Warrior, even a Hero. I tried to find one; but 
warriors are busy fighting one another in distant lands, 
and in this neighbourhood heroes are scarce, or simply 
not to be found. Swords in these parts are mostly blunt, 
and axes are used for trees, and shields as cradles or dish- 
covers; and dragons are comfortably far-off (and therefore 
legendary). That is why I settled on burglary - especially 
when I remembered the existence of a Side-door. And 
here is our little Bilbo Baggins, the burglar, the chosen and 



AN UNEXPECTED 1»ARTY 

selected burglar. So now let’s get on ind make some plans.’ 

‘Very well then,’ said Thorin, apposing the burglar- 
expert gives us some ideas or suggestions.* He turned with 
mock-politeness to Bilbo. 

‘First I should like to know a brt more about things,’ 
said he, feeling all confused and a hit shaky inside, but so 
far still Tookishly determined to go on with things. ‘I 
mean about the gold and the dragon, and all that, and 
how it got there, and who it belongs to, and so on and 
further.’ 

‘Bless me! ’ said Thorin, ‘haven’t you got a map? And 
didn’t you hear our song? And haven’t we been talking 
about all this for hours?* 

‘All the same, I should like it all plain and clear,’ said 
he obstinately, putting on his business manner (usually 
reserved for people who tried to borrow money off him), 
and doing his best to appear wise and prudent and pro¬ 
fessional and live up to Gandalf’s recommendation. ‘Also 
I should like to know about risks, out-of-pocket expenses, 
time required and remuneration, and so forth’ - by 
which he meant: ‘What am I going to get out of it? And 
am I going to come back alive?* 

‘O very well,* said Thorin. ‘Long ago in my grand¬ 
father Thror’s time our family was driven out of the far 
North, and came back with all their wealth and their 
tools to this Mountain on the map. It had been dis¬ 
covered by my far ancestor, Thrain the Old, but now 
they mined and they tunnelled and they made huger 
halls and greater workshops - and in addition I believe 
they found a good deal of gold and a great many jewels 
too. Anyway they grew immensely rich and famous, and 
iny grandfather was King under the Mountain again, and 
treated with great reverence by the mortal men, who 
lived to the South, and were gradually spreading up the 
Running River as far as the valley overshadowed by the 
Mountain. They built the merry town of Dale there in 
those days. Kings used to send for our smiths, and reward 

21 



THE HOBBIT 


even the least skilful most richly. Fathers would beg us to 
take their sons as apprentices, and pay us handsomely, 
especially in food-supplies, which we never bothered to 
grow or find for ourselves. Altogether those were good 
days for us, and the poorest of us had money to spend and 
to lend, and leisure to make beautiful things just for the 
fun of it, not to speak of the most marvellous and magical 
toys, the like of which is not to be found in the world 
now-a-days. So my grandfather's halls became full of 
armour and jewels and carvings and cups, and the toy- 
market of Dale was the wonder of the North. 

‘Undoubtedly that was what brought the dragon. 
Dragons steal gold and jewels, you know, from nien and 
elves and dwarves, wherever they can find them; and they 
guard their plunder as long as they live (which is practic¬ 
ally for ever, unless they are killed), and never enjoy a 
brass ring of it. Indeed they hardly know a good bit of 
work from a bad, though they usually have a good notion 
of the current market value; and they can't make a thing 
for themselves, not even mend a little loose scale of their 
armour. There were lots of dragons in the North in those 
days, and gold was probably getting scarce up there, with 
the dwarves flying south or getting killed, and all the 
general waste and destruction that dragons make going 
from bad to worse. There was a most specially greedy, 
strong and wicked worm called Smaug. One day he flew 
up into the air and came south. The first we heard of it 
was a noise like a hurricane coming from the North, and 
the pine-trees on the Mountain creaking and cracking in 
the wind. Some of the dwarves who happened to be out¬ 
side (I was one luckily - a fine adventurous lad in those 
days, always wandering about, and it saved my life that 
day) - well, from a good way off we saw the dragon settle 
on our mountain in a spout of flame. Then he came 
down the slopes and when he reached the woods they all 
went up in fire. By that time all the bells were ringing in 
Dale and the warriors were arming. The dwarves rushed 

aa 



AN UNEXPECTED PARTY 

out of their great gate; but there i^as the dragon waiting 
for them. None escaped that way. ^Vhe river rushed up in 
steam and a fog fell on Dale, and in the fog the dragon 
came on them and destroyed most of the warriors - the 
usual unhappy story, it was only too common in those 
days. Then he went back and crept in through the Front 
Gate and routed out all the halls, .md lanes, and tunnels, 
alleys, cellars, mansions and passages. After that there 
were no dwarves left alive inside, and he took all their 
wealth for himself. Probably, for that is the dragons* way, 
he has piled it all up in a great heap far inside, and sleeps 
on it for a bed. Later he used to crawl out of the great 
gate and come by night to Dale, and carry away people, 
especially maidens, to eat, until Dale was ruined, and all 
the people dead or gone. What goes on there now I don’t 
know for certain, but I don’t suppose any one lives nearer 
to the Mountain than the far edge of the Long Lake now¬ 
adays. 

‘The few of us that were well outside sat and wept in 
hiding, and cursed Smaug; and there we were unexpect¬ 
edly joined by my father and my grandfather with singed 
beards. They looked very grim but they said very little. 
When I asked how they had got away, they told me to 
hold my tongue, and said that one day in the proper time 
I should know. After that we went away, and we have 
had to earn our livings as best we could up and down the 
lands, often enough sinking as low as blacksmith-work or 
even coalmining. But we have never forgotten our stolen 
treasure. And even now, when I will allow we have a 
good bit laid by and are not so badly off* - here Thorin 
stroked the gold chain round his neck - ‘we still mean to 
get it back, and to bring our curses home to Smaug - if 
we can. 

‘I have often wondered about my father’s and my 
grandfather’s escape. I see now they must have had a 
private Side-door which only they knew about. But 
apparently they made a map, and I should like to know 

*3 



THE HOBBIT 


how Gandalf got hold of it, and why it did not come 
down to me, the rightful heir.* 

*I did not “get hold of it,’* T was given it,* said the 
wizard. ‘Your grandfather Thror was killed, you re¬ 
member, in the mines of Moria by Azog the Goblin.’ 

‘Curse his name, yes,* said Thorin. 

‘And Thrain your father went away on the twenty-first 
of April, a hundred years ago last Thursday, and has 
never been seen by you since - * 

‘True, true,* said Thorin. 

‘Well, your father gave me this to give to you; and if 1 
have chosen my own time and way for handing it over, 
you can hardly blame me. considering the trouble I had 
to find you. Your father could not remember his own 
name when he gave me the paper, and he never told me 
yours; so on the whole I think I ought to be praised and 
thanked! Here it is,* said he handing the map to Thorin. 

‘I don’t understand,* said Thorin, and Bilbo felt he 
would have liked to say the same. The explanation did 
not seem to explain. 

‘Your grandfather,* said the wizard slowly and grimly, 
‘gave the map to his son for safety before he went to the 
mines of Moria. Your father went away to try his luck 
with the map after your grandfather was killed; and lots 
of adventures of a most unpleasant sort he had, but he 
never got near the Mountain. How he got there I don’t 
know, Wt I found him a prisoner in the dungeons of the 
Necrorriancer.* 

‘Whatever were you doing there?* asked Thorin with a 
shudder, and all the dwarves shivered. 

‘Never you mind. I was finding things out, as usual; 
and a nasty dangerous business it was. Even I, Gandalf, 
only just escaped. I tried to save your father, but it was 
too late. He was witless and wandering, and had for¬ 
gotten almost everything except the map and the 
key.* 

‘We have long ago paid the goblins of Moria,* said 

«4 



AN UNEXPECTED PARTY 

Thorin; *we must give a thought to the Necromancer/ 
‘Don’t be absurd! He is an enemy far beyond the 
powers of all the dwarves put togc ther, if they could all 
be collected again from the four corners of the world. 
The one thing your father wished was for his son to read 
the map and use the key The drajon and the Mountain 
are more than big enough tasks fi t you! ’ 

‘Hear hear!’ said Bilbo and a(«:idently said it aloud. 
‘Hear what?’ they all said tundng suddenly towards 
him, and he was so flustered that he answered ‘Hear what 
I have got to say! ’ 

‘What’s that?’ they asked. 

‘Well, I should say that you ought to go East and have 
a look round. After all there is the Side-door, and dragons 
must sleep sometimes, T suppose. If you sit on the door¬ 
step long enough, I daresay you will think of something. 
And well, don’t you know, I think we have talked long 
enough for one night, if you see what I mean. What 
about bed, and an early start, and all that? I will give 
you a good breakfast before you go.’ 

‘Before we go, I suppose you mean,’ said Thorin. 
‘Aren’t you the burglar? And isn’t sitting on the door¬ 
step your job, not to speak of getting inside the door? 
But I agree about bed and breakfast. I like six eggs with 
my ham, when starting on a journey: fried not poaclied, 
and mind you don’t break ’em.’ 

After all the others had ordered their breakfaists with¬ 
out so much as a please (which annoyed Bilbo very 
much), they all got up. The hobbit had to find room for 
them all, and filled all his spare-rooms and made beds on 
chairs and sofas, before he got them all stowed and went 
to his own little bed very tired and not altogether happy. 
One thing he did make his mind up about was not to 
bother to get up very early and cook everybody else’s 
wretched breakfast. The Tookishness was wearing off, 
and he was not now quite so sure that he was going on 
any journey in the morning. 

*5 



THE HOBBIT 


As he lay in bed he could hear Thorin still humming 
to himself in the best bedroom next to him: 

Far over the misty mountains cold 
To dungeons deep and caverns old 
We must away, ere break of day. 

To find our long-forgotten gold. 

Bilbo went to sleep with that in his ears, and it gave 
him very uncomfortable dreams. It was long after the 
break of day when he woke up. 


2 Roast mutton 

Up jumped Bilbo, and putting on his dressing-gown went 
into the dining-room. There he saw nobody, but all the 
signs of a large and hurried breakfast. There was a fear¬ 
ful mess in the room, and piles of unwashed crocks in the 
kitchen. Nearly every pot and pan he possessed seemed to 
have been used. The washing-up was so dismally real that 
Bilbo was forced to believe the party of the night before 
had not been part of his bad dreams, as he had rather 
hoped. Indeed he was really relieved after all to think 
that they had all gone without him, and without bother¬ 
ing to wake him up (‘but with never a thank-you* he 
thought); and yet in a way he could not help feeling just 
a trifle disappointed. The feeling surprised him. 

‘Don’t be a fool. Bilbo Bagginsl* he said to himself, 
‘thinking of dragons and all that outlandish nonsense at 
your age 1 * So he put on an apron, lit fires, boiled water, 
and washed up. Then he had a nice little breakfast in the 
kitchen before turning out the dining-room. By that time 
the sun was shining; and the front door was open, letting 

a6 



ROAST MUTTON 


in a warm spring breeze. Bilbo began to whistle loudly 
and to forget about the night befo’*e. In fact he was just 
sitting down to a nice little second breakfast in the 
dining-room by the open window, when in walked 
Gandalf. 

‘My dear fellow,* said he, ‘wherever are you going to 
come? What about an early start ^ - and here you are 
having breakfast, or whatever yon call it, at half past 
ten! They left you the message, because they could not 
wait.’ 

‘What message?* said poor Mr. Baggins all in a fluster. 

‘Great Elephants!* said Gandalf, ‘you are not at all 
yourself this morning - you have never dusted the 
mantelpiece! * 

‘What*s that got to do with it? I have had enough to do 
with washing up for fourteen! ’ 

‘If you had dusted the mantelpiece, you would have 
found this just under the clock,* said Gandalf, handing 
Bilbo a note (written, of course, on his own note-paper). 

This is what he read: 

‘Thorin and Company to Burglar Bilbo greeting! 
For your hospitality our sincerest thanks, and for your 
offer of professional assistance our grateful acceptance. 
Terms: cash on delivery, up to and not exceeding one 
fourteenth of total profits (if any); all travelling expenses 
guaranteed in any event; funeral expenses to be defrayed 
by us or our representatives, if occasion arises and the 
matter is not otherwise arranged for. 

‘Thinking it unnecessary to disturb your esteemed re¬ 
pose, we have proceeded in advance to make requisite 
preparations, and shall await your respected person at 
the Green Dragon Inn, Bywater, at 11 a.m. sharp. Trust¬ 
ing that you will be punctual, 

^We have the honour to remain 
"Yours deeply 


«7 


"Thorin dr Co,' 



THE HOBBIT 


‘That leaves you just ten minutes. You will have to 
run/ said Gandalf. 

‘But - / said Bilbo. 

‘No time for it/ said the wizard. 

‘But - / said Bilbo again. 

‘No time for that either! Off you go!‘ 

To the end of his days Bilbo could never remember 
how he found himself outside, without a hat, a walking- 
stick or any money, or anything that he usually took 
when he went out; leaving his second breakfast half- 
finished and quite unwashed-up, pushing his keys into 
Gandalf’s hands, and running as fast as his furry feet 
could carry him down the lane, past the great Mill, across 
The Water, and then on for a mile or more. 

Very puffed he was, when he got to By water just on the 
stroke of eleven, and found he had come without a 
pocket-handkerchief! 

‘Bravo! ’ said Balin who was standing at the inn door 
looking out for him. 

Just then all the others came round the corner of the 
road from the village. They were on ponies, and each 
pony was slung about with all kinds of baggages, pack¬ 
ages, parcels, and paraphernalia. There was a very small 
pony, apparently for Bilbo. 

‘Up you two get, and off we go!' said Thorin. 

‘I’m awfully sorry,’ said Bilbo, ‘but I have come with¬ 
out my hat, and I have left my pocket-handkerchief be¬ 
hind, and I haven’t got any money. I didn’t get your note 
until after 10.45 precise/ 

‘Don’t be precise,’ said Dwalin, ‘and don’t worry! You 
will have to manage without pocket-handkerchiefs, and a 
good many other things, before you get to the journey’s 
end. As for a hat, I have got a spare hood and cloak in my 
luggage.* 

That’s how they all came to start, jogging off from the 
inn one fine morning just before May, on laden ponies; 
and Bilbo was wearing a dark-green hood (a little 

a8 



ROAST MUTTON 


weather-stained) and a dark-green cloak borrowed from 
Dwalin. They were too large for him, and he looked 
rather comic. What his father Bun go w^ould have thought 
of him, I daren’t think. His only comfort was he couldn't 
be mistaken for a dwarf, as he had no beard. 

They had not been riding verv long, when up came. 
Gandalf very splendid on a white horse. He had brought 
a lot of pocket-handkerchiefs, and Bilbo's pipe and to¬ 
bacco. So after that the party went along very merrily, 
and they told stories or sang songs as they rode forward 
all day, except of course when they stopped £pr meals. 
These didn't come quite as often as Bilbo would have 
liked them, but still he began to feel that adventures 
were not so bad after all. 

At first they had passed through hobbit-lands, a wide 
respectable country inhabited by decent folk, with good 
roads, an inn or two, and now and then a dwarf or a 
farmer ambling by on business. Then they came to lands 
where people spoke strangely, and sang songs Bilbo had 
never heard before. Now they had gone on far into the 
Lone-lands, where there were no people left, no inns, and 
the roads grew steadily worse. Not far ahead were dreary 
hills, rising higher and higher, dark with trees. On some 
of them were old castles with an evil look, as if they had 
been built by wicked people. Everything seemed gloomy, 
for the weather that day had taken a nasty turn. Mostly it 
had been as good as May can be, even in merry tales, but 
now it was cold and wet. In the Lone-lands they had been 
obliged to camp where they could, but at least it had 
been dry. 

‘To think it will soon be June!' grumbled Bilbo, as he 
splashed along behind the others in a very muddy track. 
It was after tea-time; it was pouring with rain, and had 
been all day; his hood was dripping into his eyes, his 
cloak was full of water; the pony was tired and stumbled 
on stones; the others were too grumpy to talk. ‘And I'm 
sure the rain has got into the dry clothes and into the 

«9 



THE HOBBIT 


food-bags/ thought Bilbo. ‘Bother burgling and every¬ 
thing to do with it! I wish I was at home in my nice hole 
by the fire, with the kettle just beginning to sing I ’ It was 
not the last time that he wished that! 

Still the dwarves jogged on, never turning round or 
•taking any notice of the hobbit. Somewhere behind the 
grey clouds the sun must have gone down, for it began to 
get dark as they went down into a deep valley with a 
river at the bottom. Wind got up, and willows along its 
banks bent and sighed. Fortunately the road went over 
an ancient stone-bridge, for the river, swollen with the 
rains, came rushing down from the hills and mountains 
in the north. 

It was nearly night when they had crossed over. The 
wind broke up the grey clouds, and a wandering moon 
appeared above the hills between the flying rags. Then 
they stopped, and Thorin muttered something about 
supper, ‘and where shall we get a dry patch to sleep on?* 

Not until then did they notice that Gandalf was missr 
ing. So far he had come all the way with them, never 
saying if he was in the adventure or merely keeping them 
company for a while. He had eaten most, talked most, 
and laughed most. But now he simply was not there at 
all I 

‘Just when a wizard would have been most useful, too,* 
groaned Dori and Nori (who shared the hobbit*s views 
about regular meals, plenty and often). 

They decided in the end that they would have to camp 
where they were. They moved to a clump of trees, and 
though it was drier under them, the wind shook the rain 
off the leaves, and the drip, drip, was most annoying. Also 
the mischief seemed to have got into the fire. Dwarves can 
make a fire almost anywhere out of almost anything, 
wind or no wind; but they could not do it that night, not 
even Oin and Gloin, who were specially good at it. 

Then one of the ponies took fright at nothing and 
bolted. He got into the river before they could catch him; 

SO 



ROAST MUTTON 


and before they could get him out again, Fili and Kili 
were nearly drowned, and all the baggage that he carried 
was washed away off him. Of couise it was mostly food, 
and there was mighty little left for supper, and less for 
breakfast. 

There they all sat glum and wet and muttering, while 
Oin and Gloin went on trying (o light the fire, and 
quarrelling about it. Bilbo was sadly reflecting that ad¬ 
ventures are not all pony-rides in May-sunshine, when 
Balin, who was always their look-out man, said: ‘There’s 
a light over there 1 * There was a hill some way off with 
trees on it, pretty thick in parts. Out of the dark mass of 
the trees they could now see a light shining, a reddish 
comfortable-looking light, as it might be a fire or torches 
twinkling. 

When they had looked at it for some while, they fell to 
arguing. Some said ‘no* and some said ‘yes'. Some said 
they could but go and see, and anything was better than 
little supper, less breakfast, and wet clothes all the 
night. 

Others said: ‘These parts are none too well known, 
and are too near the mountains. Travellers seldom come 
this way now. The old maps are no use: things have 
changed for the worse, and the road is unguarded. They 
have seldom even heard of the king round here, and the 
less inquisitive you are as you go along, the less trouble 
you are likely to find.* Some said: ‘After all there are 
fourteen of us.’ Others said: ‘Where has Gandalf got to?* 
This remark was repeated by everybody. Then the rain 
began to pour down worse than ever, and Oin and Gloin 
began to fight. 

That settled it. ‘After all we have got a burglar with 
'^s,* they said; and so they made off, leading their ponies 
(with all due and proper caution) in the direction of the 
light. They came to the hill and were soon in the wood. 
Up the hill they went; but there was no proper path to be 
seen, such as might lead to a house or a farm; and do 



THE HOBBIT 


what they could they made a deal of rustling and crack¬ 
ling and creaking (and a good deal of grumbling and 
drafting), as they went through the trees in the pitch 
dark. 

Suddenly the red light shone out very bright through 
the tree-trunks not far ahead. 

‘Now it is the burglar’s turn,* they said, meaning Bilbo. 
‘You must go on and find out all about that light, and 
what it is for, and if all is perfectly safe and canny,’ said 
Thorin to the hobbit. ‘Now scuttle off, and come back 
quick, if all is well. If not, come back if you can I If you 
can’t, hoot twice like a barn-owl and once like a screech- 
owl, and we will do what we can.’ 

Off Bilbo had to go, before he could explain that he 
could not hoot even once like any kind of owl any more 
than fly like a bat. But at any rate hobbits can move 
quietly in woods, absolutely quietly. They take a pride in 
it, and Bilbo had sniffed more than once at what He 
called ‘all this dwarvish racket’, as they went along, 
though I don’t suppose you or I would have noticed any¬ 
thing at all on a windy night, not if the whole cavalcade 
had passed two feet off. As for Bilbo walking primly to¬ 
wards the red light, I don’t suppose even a weasel would 
have stirred a whisker at it. So, naturally, he got right up 
to the fire - for fire it was - without disturbing anyone. 
And this is what he saw. 

Three very large persons sitting round a very large fire 
of beech-logs. They were toasting mutton on long spits of 
wood, and licking the gravy off their fingers. There was a 
fine toothsome smell. Also there was a barrel of good 
drink at hand, and they were drinking out of jugs. But 
they were trolls. Obviously trolls. Even Bilbo, in spite of 
his sheltered life, could see that: from the great heavy 
faces of them, and their size, and the shape of their legs, 
not to mention their language, which was not drawing¬ 
room fashion at all, at all. 

‘Mutton yesterday, mutton today, and blimey, if it 

S* 



ROAST MUTTON 


don’t look like mutton again tomorrer,* said one of the 
trolls. 

‘Never a blinking bit of manflesh have we had for long 
enough,’ said a second. ‘What thr *ell William was a- 
thinkin of to bring us into these p irts at all, beats me - 
and the drink runnin’ short, what’s more,’ he said jogging 
the elbow of William, who was taking a pull at his jug. 

William choked. ‘Shut yer mouth!’ he said as soon as 
he could. ‘Yer can’t expect folk to stop here for ever just 
to be et by you and Bert. You've ct a village and a half 
between yer, since we come down from the mountains. 
How much more d’yer want? And time’s been up our 
way, when yer’d have said “thank yer Bill” for a nice bit 
o* fat valley mutton like what this is.’ He took a big bite 
off a sheep’s leg he was toasting, and wiped his lips on his 
sleeve. 

Yes, I am afraid trolls do behave like that, even those 
with only one head each. After hearing all this Bilbo 
ought to have done something at once. Either he should 
have gone back quietly and warned his friends that there 
were three fair-sized trolls at hand in a nasty mood, quite 
likely to try toasted dwarf, or even pony, for a change; or 
else he should have done a bit of good quick burgling. A 
really first-class and legendary burglar would at this 
point have picked the trolls’ pockets - it is nearly always 
worth while, if you can manage it pinched the very 
mutton ofF the spits, purloined the beer, and walked off 
without their noticing him. Others more practical but 
with less professional pride would perhaps have stuck a 
dagger into each'of them before they observed it. Then 
the night could have been spent cheerily. 

Bilbo knew it. He had read of a good many things he 
had never seen or done. He was very much alarmed, as 
well as disgusted; he wished himself a hundred miles 
away, and yet - and yet somehow he could not go straight 
back to Thorin and Company emptyhanded. So he stood 
and hesitated in the shadows. Of the various burglarious 

SS 



THE HOBBIT 


proceedings he had heard of picking the trolls’ pockets 
seemed the least difficult, so at last he crept behind a tree 
just behind William. 

Bert and Tom went off to the barrel. William was 
having another drink. Then Bilbo plucked up courage 
and put his little hand in William’s enormous pocket. 
There was a purse in it, as big as a bag to Bilbo. ‘Ha! ’ 
thought he, warming to his new work as he lifted it care¬ 
fully out, ‘this is a beginning!’ 

It was! Trolls’ purses are the mischief, and this was no 
exception. ‘ ’Ere, *oo are you?’ it squeaked, as it left the 
pocket; and William turned round at once and grabbed 
Bilbo by the neck, before he could duck behind the tree. 

‘Blimey, Bert, look what I’ve copped! ’ said William. 

‘What is it?’ said the others coming up. 

‘Lumme, if I knows! What are yer?’ 

‘Bilbo Baggins, a bur - a hobbit,* said poor Bilbo, shak¬ 
ing all over, and wondering how to make owl-noises be¬ 
fore they throttled him. 

‘A burrahobbit?’ said they, a bit startled. Trolls are 
slow in the uptake, and mighty suspicious about any¬ 
thing new to them. 

‘What’s a burrahobbit got to do with my pocket, any¬ 
ways?’ said William. 

‘And can yer cook ’em?’ said Tom. 

‘Yer can try,’ said Bert, picking up a skewer. 

‘He wouldn’t make above a mouthful,’ said William, 
who had already had a fine supper, ‘not when he was 
skinned and boned.* 

‘P’raps there are more like him round about, and we 
might make a pie,’ said Bert. ‘Here you, are there any 
more of your sort a-sneakin’ in these here woods, yer 
nassty little rabbit,’ said he, looking at the hobbit’s furry 
feet; and he picked him up by the toes and shook him. 

‘Yes, lots,’ said Bilbo, before he remembered not to give 
his friends away. ‘No none at all, not one,’ he said 
immediately afterwards. 

S 4 



ROAST MUTTON 


‘What d'yer mean?* said Bert, l.olding him right way 
up, by the hair this time. 

‘What I say,’ said Bilbo gasping. And please don’t cook 
me, kind sirsl I am a good cook myself, and cook better 
than I cook, if you see what I mean. I’ll cook beautifully 
for you, a perfectly beautiful bre ikfast for you, if only 
you won’t have me for supper.’ 

‘Poor little blighter,’ said William. He had already had 
as much supper as he could hold; also he had had lots of 
beer. ‘Poor little blighter! Let him go!’ 

‘Not till he says what he means by lots and none at all* 
said Bert. ‘I don’t want to have me throat cut in me 
sleep! Hold his toes in the (ire, till he talks!’ 

‘I won’t have it,’ said William. ‘I caught him anyway.’ 

‘You’re a fat fool, William,’ said Bert, ‘as I’ve said afore 
this evening.’ 

‘And you’re a lout! ’ 

‘And I won’t take that from you. Bill Huggins,’ says 
Bert, and puts his fist in William’s eye. 

Then there Vas a gorgeous row. Bilbo had just enough 
wits left, when Bert dropped him on the ground, to 
scramble out of the way of their feet, before they were 
fighting like dogs, and calling one another all sorts of 
perfectly true and applicable names in very loud voices. 
Soon they were locked in one another’s arms, and rolling 
nearly into the fire kicking and thumping, while Tom 
whacked at them both with a branch to bring them to 
their senses - and that of course only made them madder 
than ever. 

That would have been the time for Bilbo to have left. 
But his poor little feet had been very squashed in Bert’s 
big paw, and he had no breath in his body, and his head 
was going round; so there he lay for a while panting, just 
outside the circle of firelight. 

Right in the middle of the fight up came Balin. The 
dwarves had heard noises from a distance, and after wait¬ 
ing for some time for Bilbo to come back, or to hoot like 

S5 



THE HOBBIT 


an owl, they started off one by one to creep towards the 
light as quietly as they could. No sooner did Tom see 
Balin come into the light than he gave an awful howl. 
Trolls simply detest the very sight of dwarves (uncooked). 
Bert and Bill stopped fighting immediately, and ‘a sack, 
Tom, quick! ’ they said. Before Balin, who was wonder¬ 
ing where in all this commotion Bilbo was, knew what 
was happening, a sack was over his head, and he was 
down. 

‘There’s more to come yet,’ said Tom, ‘or I’m mighty 
mistook. Lots and none at all, it is,’ said he. ‘No burra- 
hobbits, but lots of these here dwarves. That’s about the 
shape of it! ’ 

‘I reckon you’re right,’ said Bert, ‘and we’d best get out 
of the light.’ 

And so they did. With sacks in their hands, that they 
used for carrying off mutton and other plunder, they 
waited in the shadows. As each dwarf came up and 
looked at the fire, and the spilled jugs, and the gnawed 
mutton, in surprise, pop! went a nasty smelly sack over 
his head, and he was down. Soon Dwalin lay by Balin, 
and Fili and Kili together, and Dori and Nori and Ori all 
in a heap, and Oin and Gloin and Bifur and Bofur and 
Bombur piled uncomfortably near the fire. 

‘That’ll teach ’em,’ said Tom; for Bifur and Bombur 
had given a lot of trouble, and fought like mad, as 
dwarves will when cornered. 

Thorin came last - and he was not caught unawares. 
He came expecting mischief, and didn’t need to see his 
friends’ legs sticking out of sacks to tell that things 
were not all well. He stood outside in the shadows some 
way off, and said: ‘What’s all this trouble? Who has been 
knocking my people about?’ 

‘It’s trolls 1 ’ said Bilbo from behind a tree. They had 
forgotten all about him. ‘They're hiding in the bushes 
with sacks,’ said he. 

‘O! are they?' said Thorin, and he jumped forward to 

86 



ROAST MUTTON 


the fire, before they could leap on him. He caught up a 
big branch all on fire at one end; and Bert got that end 
in his eye before he could step aside. That put him out of 
the battle for a bit. Bilbo did his best. He caught hold of 
Tom’s leg - as well as he could, i? was thick as a young 
tree-trunk - but he was sent spinning up into the top of. 
some bushes, when Tom kicked th< sparks up in Thorin’s 
face. 

Tom got the branch in his teeth for that, and lost one 
of the front ones. It made him howl, I can tell you. But 
just at that moment William came up behind and 
popped a sack right over Thorin’s head and down to his 
toes. And so the fight ended. A nice pickle they were all 
in now: all neatly tied up in sacks, with three angry 
trolls (and two with burns and bashes to remember) sit¬ 
ting by them, arguing whether they should roast them 
slowly, or mince them fine and boil them, or just sit on 
them one by one and squash them into jelly: and Bilbo 
up in a bush, with his clothes and his skin torn, not 
daring to move for fear they should hear him. 

It was just then that Gandalf came back. But no one 
saw him. The trolls had just decided to roast the dwarves 
now and eat them later - that was Bert’s idea, and after a 
lot of argument they had all agreed to it. 

‘No good roasting ’em now, it’d take all night,’ said a 
voice. Bert thought it was William’s. 

‘Don’t start the argument all over again. Bill,’ he said, 
‘or it will take all night.’ 

‘Who’s a-arguing?’ said William, who thought it was 
Bert that had spoken. 

‘You are,’ said Bert. 

‘You’re a liar,’ said William; and so the argument 
began all over again. In the end they decided to mince 
them fine and boil them. So they got a great black pot, 
and they took out their knives. 

‘No good boiling ’em I We ain’t got no water, and it’s a 

S7 



THE HOBBIT 

long way to the well and all/ said a voice. Bert and 
William thought it was Tom’s. 

‘Shut up 1 ’ said they, ‘or we’ll never have done. And yer 
can fetch the water yerself, if yer say any more.’ 

‘Shut up yerself!’ said Tom, who thought it was 
William’s voice. ‘Who’s arguing but you, I’d like to 
know.’ 

‘You’re a booby,’ said William. 

‘Booby yerself!’ said Tom. 

And so the argument began all over again, and went 
on hotter than ever, until at last they decided to sit on 
the sacks one by one and squash them, and boil them 
next time. 

‘Who shall we sit on first?’ said the voice. 

‘Better sit on the last fellow first,’ said Bert, whose eye 
had been damaged by Thorin. He thought Tom was 
talking. 

‘Don’t talk to yerself!’ said Tom. ‘But if you wants to 
sit on the last one, sit on him. Which is he?’ 

‘The one with the yellow stockings,’ said Bert. 

‘Nonsense, the one with the grey stockings,’ said a voice 
like William’s. 

‘I made sure it was yellow,’ said Bert. 

‘Yellow it was,* said William. 

‘Then what did yer say it was grey for?’ said Bert. 

‘I never did. Tom said it.’ 

‘That I never did!* said Tom. ‘It was you.* 

‘Two to one, so shut yer mouth!’ said Bert. 

‘Who are you a-talkin’ to?’ said William. 

‘Now stop it!’ said Tom and Bert together. ‘The 
night’s gettin’ on, and dawn comes early. Let’s get on 
with it! ’ 

‘Dawn take you all, and be stone to you! ’ said a voice 
that sounded like William’s. But it wasn’t. For just at 
that moment the light came over the hill, and there was a 
mighty twitter in the branches. William never spoke for 
he stood turned to stone as he stooped; and Bert and 

38 



ROAST MUTTON 


Tom were stuck like rocks as thev looked at him. And 
there they stand to this day, all ;ilone, unless the birds 
j>erch on them; for trolls, as you ptobably know, must be 
underground before dawn, or they go back to the stuff of 
the mountains they are made of, md never move again. 
That is what had happened to Bert and Tom and. 
William. 

‘Excellent! ’ said Gandalf, as he stepped from behind a 
tree, and helped Bilbo to climb down out of a thorn- 
bush. Then Bilbo understood. It was the wizard’s voice 
that had kept the trolls bickering and quarrelling, until 
the light came and made an end of them. 

The next thing was to untie the sacks and let out the 
dwarves. They were nearly suffocated, and very annoyed: 
they had not at all enjoyed lying there listening to the 
trolls making plans for roasting them and squashing 
them and mincing them. They had to hear Bilbo’s 
account of what had happened to him twice over, before 
they were satisfied. 

‘Silly time to go practising pinching and pocket-pick¬ 
ing,’ said Bombur, ‘when what we wanted was fire and 
food I * 

‘And that’s just what you wouldn’t have got of those 
fellows without a struggle, in any case,’ said Gandalf. 
‘Anyhow you are wasting time now. Don’t you realize 
that the trolls must have a cave or a hole dug somewhere 
near to hide from the sun in? We must look into it! * 

They searched about, and soon found the marks of 
trolls’ stony boots going away through the trees. They 
followed the tracks up the hill, until hidden by bushes 
they came on a big door of stone leading to a cave. But 
they could not open it, not though they all pushed while 
Gandalf tried various incantations. 

‘Would this be any good?’ asked Bilbo, when they were 
getting tired and angry. ‘I found it on the ground where 
the trolls had their fight.’ He held out a largish key, 
though no doubt William had thought it very small and 

39 



THE HOBBIT 


secret. It must have fallen out of his pocket, very luckily, 
before he was turned to stone. 

‘Why on earth didn’t you mention it before?’ they 
cried. Gandalf grabbed it and fitted it into the key-hole. 
Then the stone door swung back with one big push, and 
they all went inside. There were bones on the floor and a 
nasty smell was in the air; but there was a good deal of 
food jumbled carelessly on shelves and on the ground, 
among an untidy litter of plunder of all sorts, from brass 
buttons to pots full of gold coins standing in a corner. 
There were lots of clothes, too, hanging on the walls - too 
small for trolls, I am afraid they belonged to victims - 
and among them were several swords of various makes, 
shapes, and sizes. Two caught their eyes particularly, be¬ 
cause of their beautiful scabbards and jewelled hilts. 

Gandalf and Thorin each took one of these; and Bilbo 
took a knife in a leather sheath. It would have made only 
a tiny pocket-knife for a troll, but it was as good as a 
short sword for the hobbit. 

‘These look like good blades,’ said the wizard, half 
drawing them and looking at them curiously. ‘They were 
not made by any troll, nor by any smith among men in 
these parts and days; but when we can read the runes on 
them, we shall know more about them.’ 

‘Let’s get out of this horrible smell! ’ said Fili. So they 
carried out the pots of coins, and such food as was un¬ 
touched and looked fit to eat, also one barrel of ale which 
was still full. By that time they felt like breakfast, and 
being very hungry they did not turn their noses up at 
what they had got from the trolls’ larder. Their own pro¬ 
visions were very scanty. Now they had bread and cheese, 
and plenty of ale, and bacon to toast in the embers of the 
fire. 

After that they slept, for their night had been dis¬ 
turbed; and they did nothing more till the afternoon. 
Then they brought up their ponies, and carried away the 
pots of gold, and buried them very secretly not far from 

40 



ROAST MUTTON 

the track by the river, putting a great many spells over 
them, just in case they ever had the chance to come back 
and recover them. When that was done, they all mounted 
once more, and jogged along again on the path towards 
the East. 

‘Where did you go to, if I ma^ ask?' said Thorin to^ 
Gandalf as they rode along. 

‘To look ahead,' said he. 

‘And what brought you back in the nick of time? 

‘Looking behind,' said he. 

‘Exactly! ’ said Thorin: ‘but could you be more plain?’ 

‘I went on to spy out our road. It will soon become 
dangerous and difficult. Also I was anxious about re¬ 
plenishing our small stock of provisions. I had not gone 
very far, however, when I met a couple of friends of mine 
from RivendelL’ 

‘Where’s that?' asked Bilbo. 

‘Don’t interrupt! ’ said Gandalf. ‘You will get there in 
a few days now, if we're lucky, and find out all about it. 
As I was saying I met two of Elrond's people. They were 
hurrying along for fear of the trolls. It was they who told 
me that three of them had come down from the moun¬ 
tains and settled in the woods not far from the road: 
they had frightened everyone away from the district, and 
they waylaid strangers. 

‘I immediately had a feeling that I was wanted back. 
Looking behind I saw a fire in the distance and made for 
it. So now you know. Please be more careful, next time, or 
we shall never get anywhere!' 

‘Thank you I' said Thorin. 


41 



3 A short rest 

They did not sing or tell stories that day, even though the 
weather improved; nor the next day, nor the day after. 
They had begun to feel that danger was not far away on 
either side. They camped under the stars, and their 
horses had more to eat than they had; for there was 
plenty of grass, but there was not much in their bags, 
even with what they had got from the trolls. One morn¬ 
ing they forded a river at a wide shallow place full of the 
noise of stones and foam. The far bank was steep and 
slippery. When they got to the top of it, leading their 
ponies, they saw that the great mountains had marched 
down very near to them. Already they seemed only a 
day’s easy journey from the feet of the nearest. Dark and 
drear it looked, though there were patches of sunlight on 
its brown sides, and behind its shoulders the tips of snow- 
peaks gleamed. 

‘Is that The Mountain?* asked Bilbo in a solemn voice, 
looking at it with round eyes. He had never seen a thing 
that looked so big before. 

‘Of course not 1 ’ said Balin. ‘That is only the beginning 
of the Misty Mountains, and we have got to get through, 
or over, or under those somehow, before we can come into 
Wilderland beyond. And it is a deal of a way even from 
the other side of them to the Lonely Mountain in the 
East where Smaug lies on our treasure.* 

‘01 * said Bilbo, and just at that moment he felt more 
tired than he ever remembered feeling before. He was 
thinking once again of his comfortable chair before the 
fire in his favourite sitting-room in his hobbit-hole, and 
of the kettle singing. Not for the last time! 


Now Gandalf led the way. *We must not miss the road, 

4 * 



A SHORT REST 


or we shall be done for/ he said. ‘^V^e need food, for one 
thing, and rest in reasonable safety - also it is very neces¬ 
sary to tackle the Misty Mountains Uy the proper path, or 
else you will get lost in them, and have to come back and 
start at the beginning again (if you ever get back at all).* 

They asked him where he was making for, and he 
answered: ‘You are come to the vei v edge of the Wild, as 
some of you may know. Hidden somewhere ahead of us is 
the fair valley of Rivendell where Eirond lives in the Last 
Homely House. I sent a message by my friends, and we 
are expected.* 

That sounded nice and comforting, but they had not 
got there yet, and it was not so easy as it sounds to find 
the Last Homely House west of the Mountains. There 
seemed to be no trees and no valleys and no hills to break 
the ground in front of them, only one vast slope going 
slowly up and up to meet the feet of the nearest moun¬ 
tain, a wide land the colour of heather and crumbling 
rock, with patches and slashes of grass-green and moss- 
green showing where water might be. 

Morning passed, afternoon came; but in all the silent 
waste there was no sign of any dwelling. They were grow¬ 
ing anxious, for they saw now that the house might be 
hidden almost anywhere between them and the moun¬ 
tains. They came on unexpected valleys, narrow with 
steep sides, that opened suddenly at their feet, and they 
looked down surprised to see trees below them and run¬ 
ning water at the bottom. There were gullies that they 
could almost leap over, but very deep with waterfalls in 
them. There were dark ravines that one could neither 
jump over nor climb into. There were bogs, some of them 
green pleasant places to look at, with flowers growing 
bright and tall; but a pony that walked there with a pack 
on its back would never have come out again. 

It was indeed a much wider land from the ford to the 
mountains than ever you would have guessed. Bilbo was 
astonished. The only path was marked with white stones* 

4S 



THE HOBBIT 


some of which were small, and others were half covered 
with moss or heather. Altogether it was a very slow 
business following the track, even guided by Gandalf, 
who seemed to know his way about pretty well. 

His head and beard wagged this way and that as he 
looked for the stones, and they followed his lead, but they 
seemed no nearer to the end of the search when the day 
began to fail. Tea-time had long gone by, and it seemed 
supper-time would soon do the same. There were moths 
fluttering about, and the light became very dim, for the 
moon had not risen. Bilbo’s pony began to stumble over 
roots and stones. They came to the edge of a steep fall in 
the ground so suddenly that Gandalf's horse nearly 
slipped down the slope. 

‘Here it is at last!’ he called, and the others gathered 
round him and looked over the edge. They saw a valley 
far below. They could hear the voice of hurrying water in a 
rocky bed at the bottom; the scent of trees was in the air; 
and there was a light on the valley-side across the water. 

Bilbo never forgot the way they slithered and slipped 
in the dusk down the steep zig-zag path into the secret 
valley of Rivendell. The air grew warmer as they got 
lower, and the smell of the pine-trees made him drowsy, 
so that every now and again he nodded and nearly fell 
off, or bumped his nose on the pony’s neck. Their spirits 
rose as they went down and down. The trees changed to 
beech and oak, and there was a comfortable feeling in the 
twilight. The last green had almost faded out of the grass, 
when they came at length to an open glade not far above 
the banks of the stream. 

‘Hmmm! it smells like elves!’ thought Bilbo, and he 
looked up at the stars. They were burning bright and 
blue. Just then there came a burst of song like laughter in 
the trees: 


Ol What are you doing, 
And where are you going? 


44 



A SHORT REST 


Your ponies need shoeing! 

The river is flowing! 

O! tra-la-la-lally 

here down in the valley! 

O! What are you seeking. 

And where are you making? 

The faggots are reeking. 

The bannocks are baking! 

O! tril-lil-lil-lolly 
the valley is jolly, 
ha! ha! 

O! Where are you going 
With beards all a-wagging? 

No knowing, no knowing 
What brings Mister Baggins, 

And Balin and Dwalin 
down into the valley 
in June 
ha! ha! 

O! Will you be staying. 

Or will you be flying? 

Your ponies are straying! 

The daylight is dying! 

To fly would be folly. 

To stay would be jolly 
And listen and hark 
Till the end of the dark 
to our tune 
ha! ha! 

So they laughed and sang in the trees; and pretty fair 
nonsense I daresay you think it. Not that they would 
care; they would only laugh all the more if you told them 
so. They were elves of course. Soon Bilbo caught glimpses 

45 



THE HOBBIT 


of them as the darkness deepened. He loved elves, though 
he seldom met them; but he was a little frightened of 
them too. Dwarves don't get on well with them. Even 
decent enough dwarves like Thorin and his friends 
think them foolish (which is a very foolish thing to 
think), or get annoyed with them. For some elves tease 
them and laugh at them, and most of all at their 
beards. 

‘Well, well!* said a voice. ‘Just look! Bilbo the hobbit 
on a pony, my dear! Isn't it delicious!' 

‘Most astonishing wonderful! * 

Then off they went into another song as ridiculous as 
the one I have written down in full. At last one, a tall 
young fellow, came out from the trees and bowed to 
Gandalf and to Thorin. 

‘Welcome to the valley!* he said. 

‘Thank you!' said Thorin a bit gruffly; but Gandalf 
was already off his horse and among the elves talking 
merrily with them. 

‘You are a little out of your way,' said the elf: ‘that is, 
if you are making for the only path across the water and 
to the house beyond. We will set you right, but you had 
best get on foot, until you are over the bridge. Are you 
going to stay a bit and sing with us, or will you go 
straight on? supper is preparing over there,' he said. ‘I 
can smell the wood-fires for the cooking.' 

Tired as he was. Bilbo would have liked to stay a 
while. Elvish singing is not a thing to miss, in June under 
the stars, not if you care for such things. Also he would 
have liked to have a few private words with these people 
that seemed to know his names and all about him, 
although he had never seen them before. He thought 
their opinion of his adventure might be interesting. Elves 
know a lot and are wondrous folk for news, and know 
what is going on among the peoples of the land, as quick 
as water flows, or quicker. 

But the dwarves were all for supper as soon as possible 

46 



A SHORT REST 


just then, and would not stay. On they all went, leading 
their ponies, till they were brought to a good path and so 
at last to the very brink of the riv< r. It was flowing fast 
and noisily, as mountain-streams do of a summer evening, 
when sun has been all day on thr snow far up above. 
There was only a narrow bridge of stone without a 
parapet, as narrow as a pony could well walk on; and 
over that they had to go, slow and careful, one by one, 
each leading his pony by the biidle. The elves had 
brought bright lanterns to the shore, and they sang a 
merry song as the party went across. 

‘Don’t dip your beard in the foam, father I ’ they cried 
to Thorin, who was bent almost on to his hands and 
knees. ‘It is long enough without watering it.’ 

‘Mind Bilbo doesn’t eat all the cakes! ’ they called. ‘He 
is too fat to get through key-holes yet 1 * 

‘Hush, hush! Good People! and good night!’ said 
Gandalf, who came last. ‘Valleys have ears, and some 
elves have over merry tongues. Good night! ’ 

And so at last they all came to the Last Homely House, 
and found its doors flung wide. 

Now it is a strange thing, but things that are good to 
have and days that are good to spend are soon told about, 
and not much to listen to; while things that are uncom¬ 
fortable, palpitating, and even gruesome, may make a 
good tale, and take a deal of telling anyway. They stayed 
long in that good house, fourteen days at least, and they 
found it hard to leave. Bilbo would gladly have stopped 
there for ever and ever - even supposing a wish would 
have taken him right back to his hobbit-hole without 
trouble. Yet there is little to tell about their stay. 

The master of the house was an elf-friend - one of 
those people whose fathers came into the strange stories 
before the beginning of History, the wars of the evil 
goblins and the elves and the first men in the North. In 
those days of our tale there were still some people who 

47 



THE HOBBIT 


had both elves and heroes of the North for ancestors, and 
Elrond the master of the house was their chief. 

He was as noble and as fair in face as an elf-lord, as 
strong as a warrior, as wise as a wizard, as venerable as a 
king of dwarves, and as kind as summer. He comes into 
many tales, but his part in the story of Bilbo’s great 
adventure is only a small one, though important, as you 
will see, if we ever get to the end of it. His house was 
perfect, whether you liked food, or sleep, or work, or 
storytelling, or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, 
or a pleasant mixture of them all. Evil things did not 
come into that valley. 

I wish I had time to tell you even a few of the tales or 
one or tw'o of the songs that they heard in that house. All 
of them, the ponies as well, grew refreshed and strong in 
a few days there. Their clothes were mended as well as 
their bruises, their tempers and their hopes. Their bags 
w^ere filled with food and provisions light to carry but 
strong to bring them over the mountain passes. Their 
plans were improved with the best advice. So the time 
came to midsummer eve, and they were to go on again 
with the early sun on midsummer morning. 

Elrond knew all about runes of every kind. That day 
he looked at the swords they had brought from the trolls’ 
lair, and he said: ‘These are not troll-make. They are old 
swords, very old swords of the High Elves of the West, my 
kin. They were made in Gondolin for the Goblin-wars. 
They must have come from a dragon’s hoard or goblin 
plunder, for dragons and goblins destroyed that city 
many ages ago. This, Thorin, the runes name Orcrist, the 
Goblin-cleaver in the ancient tongue of Gondolin; it was 
a famous blade. This, Gandalf, was Glamdring the Foe- 
hammer that the king of Gondolin once wore. Keep them 
well I ’ 

‘Whence did the trolls get them, I wonder?* said 
Thorin, looking at his sword with new interest. 

*I could not say,’ said Elrond, ‘but one may guess that 

48 



A SHORT REST 


your trolls had plundered other p onderers, or come on 
the remnants of old robberies in soine hold in the moun¬ 
tains. I have heard that there are sull forgotten treasures 
of old to be found in the deserted c iverns of the mines of 
Moria, since the dwarf and goblin war.’ 

Thorin pondered these words. M will keep this sword . 
in honour,’ he said. ‘May it soon cleave goblins once 
again! ’ 

‘A wish that is likely to be grantrd soon enough in the 
mountains!* said Elrond. ‘But show me now your 
map! * 

He took it and gazed long at it, and he shook his head; 
for if he did not altogether approve of dwarves and their 
love of gold, he hated dragons and their cruel wickedness, 
and he grieved to remember the ruin of the town of Dale 
and its merry bells, and the burned banks of the bright 
River Running. The moon was shining in a broad silver 
crescent. He held up the map and the white light shone 
through it. ‘What is this?’ he said. ‘There are moon- 
letters here, beside the plain runes which say “five feet 
high the door and three may walk abreast’*.* 

‘What are moon-letters?* asked the hobbit, full of 
excitement. He loved maps, as I have told you before; 
and he also likeef runes and letters and cunning hand¬ 
writing, though when he wrote himself it was a bit thin 
and spidery. 

‘Moon-letters are rune-letters, but you cannot see 
them,* said Elrond, ‘not when you look straight at them. 
They can only be seen when the moon shines behind 
them, and what is more, with the more cunning sort it 
must be a moon of the same shape and season as the day 
when they were written. The dwarves invented them and 
wrote them with silver pens, as your friends could tell 
you. These must have been written on a midsummer’s eve 
in a crescent moon, a long while ago.* 

‘What do they say?’ asked Gan dal f and Thorin to¬ 
gether, a bit vexed perhaps that even Elrond should have 

49 



THE HOBBIT 


found this out first, though really there had not been a 
chance before, and there would not have been another 
until goodness knows when. 

‘Stand by the grey stone when the thrush knocks,’ read 
Elrond, ‘and the setting sun with the last light of Durin’s 
Day will shine upon the key-hole.’ 

‘Durin, Durin I ’ said Thorin. ‘He was the father of the 
fathers of the eldest race of Dwarves, the Longbeards, and 
my first ancestor: I am his heir.* 

‘Then what is Durin’s Day?’ asked Elrond. 

‘The first day of the dwarves’ New Year,* said Thorin, 
‘is as all should know the first day of the last moon of 
Autumn on the threshold of Winter. We still call it 
Durin’s Day when the last moon of Autumn and the sun 
are in the sky together. But this will not help us much, I 
fear, for it passes our skill in these days to guess when 
such a time will come again.’ 

‘That remains to be seen,’ said Gandalf. ‘Is there any 
more writing?’ 

‘None to be seen by this moon,’ said Elrond, and he 
gave the map back to Thorin; and then they went down 
to the water to see the elves dance and sing upon the 
midsummer’s eve. 

The next morning was a midsummer’s morning as fair 
and fresh as could be dreamed: blue sky and never a 
cloud, and the sun dancing on the water. Now they rode 
away amid songs of farewell and good speed, with their 
hearts ready for more adventure, and with a knowledge 
of the road they must follow over the Misty Mountains to 
the land beyond. 


60 



4 Over hill and under hill 

There were many paths that led up into those mountains, 
and many passes over them. But most of the paths were 
cheats and deceptions and led nou here or to bad ends; 
and most of the passes were infested by evil things and 
dreadful dangers. The dwarves and the hobbit, helped by 
the wise advice of Elrond and the knowledge and 
memory of Gandalf, took the right road to the right pass. 

Long days after they had climbed out of the valley and 
left the Last Homely House miles behind, they were still 
going up and up and up. It was a hard path and a 
dangerous path, a crooked way and a lonely and a long. 
Now they could look back over the lands they had left, 
laid out behind them far below. Far, far away in the 
West, where things were blue and faint, Bilbo knew there 
lay his own country of safe and comfortable things, and 
his little hobbit-hole. He shivered. It was getting bitter 
cold up here, and the wind came shrill among the rocks. 
Boulders, too, at times came galloping down the moun¬ 
tain-sides, let loose by mid-day sun upon the snow, and 
passed among them (which was lucky), or over their heads 
(which was alarming). The nights were comfortless and 
chill, and they did not dare to sing or talk too loud, for 
the echoes were uncanny, and the silence seemed to dis¬ 
like being broken - except by the noise of water and the 
wail of wind and the crack of stone. 

‘The summer is getting on down below,' thought 
Bilbo, ‘and haymaking is going on and picnics. They will 
be harvesting and blackbcnying, before we even begin to 
go down the other side at this rate.' And the others were 
thinking equally gloomy thoughts, although when they 
had said good-bye to Elrond in the high hope of a mid¬ 
summer morning, they had spoken gaily of the passage 

51 



THE HOBBIT 


of the mountains and of riding swift across the lands be¬ 
yond. They had thought of coming to the secret door in 
the Lonely Mountain, perhaps that very next first moon 
of Autumn - ‘and perhaps it will be Durin’s Day’ they 
had said. Only Gandalf had shaken his head and said 
nothing. Dwarves had not passed that way for many 
years, but Gandalf had, and he knew how evil and 
danger had grown and thriven in the Wild, since the 
dragons had driven men from the lands, and the goblins 
had spread in secret after the battle of the Mines of 
Moria. Even the good plans of wise wizards like Gandalf 
and of good friends like Elrond go astray sometimes when 
you are off on dangerous adventures over the Edge of the 
Wild; and Gandalf was a wise enough wizard to know 
it. 


He knew that something unexpected might happen, 
and he hardly dared to hope that they would pass with¬ 
out fearful adventure over those great tall mountains 
with lonely peaks and valleys where no king ruled. They 
did not. All was well, until one day they met a thunder¬ 
storm - more than a thunderstorm, a thunder-battle. You 
know how terriffic a really big thunderstorm can be down 
in the land and in a river-valley; especially at times when 
two great thunderstorms meet and clash. More terrible 
still are thunder and lightning in the mountains at night, 
when storms come up from East and West and make war. 
The lightning splinters on the peaks, and rocks shiver, 
and great crashes split the air and go rolling and tumb¬ 
ling into every cave and hollow; and the darkness is filled 
with overwhelming noise and sudden light. 

Bilbo had never seen or imagined anything of the 
kind. They were high up in a narrow place, with a dread¬ 
ful fall into a dim valley at one side of them. There they 
were sheltering under a hanging rock for the night, and 
he lay beneath a blanket and shook from head to toe. 
When he peeped out in the lightning-flashes, he saw that 

5« 



OVER HILL AND UNDER HILL 

across the valley the stone-giants weie out, and were hurl¬ 
ing rocks at one another for a game, and catching them, 
and tossing them down into the darkness where they 
smashed among the trees far below, or splintered into 
little bits with a bang. Then came a wind and a rain, and 
the wind whipped the rain and the hail about in every 
direction, so that an overhanging rock was no protection 
at all. Soon they were getting drent hed and their ponies 
were standing with their heads down and their tails be¬ 
tween their legs, and some of them were whinnying with 
fright. They could hear the giants guffawing and shout¬ 
ing all over the mountainsides. 

‘This won’t do at all!’ said Thorin. ‘If we don’t get 
blown off, or drowned, or struck by lightning, we shall be 
picked up by some giant and kicked sky-high for a foot¬ 
ball.* 

‘Well, if you know of anywhere better, take us there! ’ 
said Gandalf, who was feeling very grumpy, and was far 
from happy about the giants himself. 

The end of their argument was that they sent Fili and 
Kili to look for a better shelter. They had very sharp eyes, 
and being the youngest of the dwarves by some fifty years 
they usually got these sort of jobs (when everybody could 
see that it was absolutely no use sending Bilbo). There is 
nothing like looking, if you want to find something (or so 
Thorin said to the young dwarves). You certainly usually 
find something, if you look, but it is not always quite the 
something you were after. So it proved on this occasion. 

Soon Fili and Kili came crawling back, holding on to 
the rocks in the wind. ‘We have found a dry cave,* they 
said, ‘not far round the next corner; and ponies and all 
could get inside.’ 

‘Have you thoroughly explored it?* said the wizard, 
who knew that caves up in the mountains were seldom 
Unoccupied. 

‘Yes, yes!’ they said, though everybody knew they 
could not have been long about it; they bad come back 

S3 



THE HOBBIT 


too quick. *lt isn’t all that big» and it does not go far 
back.’ 

That, of course, is the dangerous part about caves: you 
don’t know how far they go back, sometimes, or where a 
passage behind may lead to, or what is waiting for you 
inside. But now Fili and Kili’s news seemed good enough. 
So they all got up and prepared to move. The wind was 
howling and the thunder still growling, and they had a 
business getting themselves and their ponies along. Still 
it was not very far to go, and before long they came to a 
big rock standing out into the path. If you stepped be¬ 
hind, you found a low arch in the side of the mountain. 
There was just room to get the ponies through with a 
squeeze, when they had been unpacked and unsaddled. 
As they passed under the arch, it was good to hear the 
wind and the rain outside instead of all about them, and 
to feel safe from the giants and their rocks. But the 
wizard was taking no risks. He lit up his wand - as he did 
that day in Bilbo’s dining-room that seemed so long ago, 
if you remember -, and by its light they explored the 
cave from end to end. 

It seemed quite a fair size, but not too large and 
mysterious. It had a dry floor and some comfortable 
nooks. At one end there w’^as room for the ponies; and 
there they stood (mighty glad of the change) steaming, 
and champing in their nosebags. Oin and Gloin wanted 
to light a fire at the door to dry their clo^thes, but Gandalf 
would not hear of it. So they spread out their wet things 
on the floor, and got dry ones out of their bundles; then 
they made their blankets comfortable, got out their pipes 
and blew smoke rings, which Gandalf turned into 
different colours and set dancing up by the roof to amuse 
them. They talked and talked, and forgot about the 
storm, and discussed what each would do with his share 
of the treasure (when they got it, which at the moment 
did not seen so impossible); and so they dropped off to 
sleep one by one. And that was the last time that they 

54 



OVER HILL AND UNDER HILL 

used the ponies, packages, baggages, tools, and para¬ 
phernalia that they had brought with them. 

It turned out a good thing that night that they had 
brought little Bilbo with them, aftrr all. For, somehow, 
he could not go to sleep for a long while; and when he 
did sleep, he had very nasty dreamv. He dreamed that a 
crack in the wall at the back of the' cave got bigger and 
bigger, and opened wider and wider, and he was very 
afraid but could not call out or do anything but lie and 
look. Then he dreamed that the floor of the cave was 
giving way, and he was slipping - beginning to fall down, 
down, goodness knows where to. 

At that he woke up with a horrible start, and found 
that part of his dream was true. A crack had opened at 
the back of the cave, and was already a wide passage. He 
was just in time to see the last of the ponies* tails dis¬ 
appearing into it. Of course he gave a very loud yell, as 
loud a yell as a hobbit can give, which is surprising for 
their size. 

Out jumped the goblins, big goblins, great ugly-look- 
ing goblins, lots of goblins, before you could say rocks 
and blocks. There were six to each dwarf, at least, and 
two even for Bilbo; and they were all grabbed and 
carried through the crack, before you could say tinder 
and flint. But not Gandalf. Bilbo’s yell had done that 
much good. It had wakened him up wide in a splintered 
second, and when goblins came to grab him, there was a 
terrific flash like lightning in the cave, a smell like gun¬ 
powder, and several of them fell dead. 

The crack closed with a snap, and Bilbo and the 
dwarves were on the wrong side of it! Where was Gan¬ 
dalf? Of that neither they nor the goblins had any idea, 
and the goblins did not wait to find out. They seized 
Bilbo and the dwarves and hurried them along. It was 
deep, deep, dark, such as only goblins that have taken to 
Jiving in the heart of the mountains can see through. The 
passages there were crossed and tangled in all directions, 

55 



THE HOBBIT 


but the goblins knew their way, as well as you do to the 
nearest post-office; and the way went down and down, 
and it was most horribly stuffy. The goblins were very 
rough, and pinched unmercifully, and chuckled and 
laughed in their horrible stony voices; and Bilbo was 
more unhappy even than when the troll had picked him 
up by his toes. He wished again and again for his nice 
bright hobbit-hole. Not for the last time. 

Now there came a glimmer of a red light before them. 
The goblins began to sing, or croak, keeping time with 
the flap of their flat feet on the stone, and shaking their 
prisoners as well. 

Clap! Snap! the black crack! 

Grip, grab! Pinch, nab! 

And down down to Goblindown 
You go, my lad! 

Clash, crash! Crush, smash! 

Hammer and tongs! Knocker and gongs! 

Pound, pound, far underground! 

Ho, ho! my lad! 

Swish, smack! Whip crack! 

Batter and beat! Yammer and bleat! 

Work, work! Nor dare to shirk. 

While Goblins quaff, and Goblins laugh, 

Round and round far underground 
Below, my lad! 

It sounded truly terrifying. The walls echoed to the 
clap, snap I and the crush, smash ! and to the ugly laugh- 
ter of their ho, ho I my lad ! The general meaning of the 
song was only too plain; for now the goblins took out 
whips and whipped them with a swish, smack !, and set 
them running as fast as they could in front of them; and 
more than one of the dwarves were already yammering 

56 



OVER HILL AND UNDER HILL 

and bleating like anything, when rhey stumbled into a 
big cavern. 

It was lit by a great red fire in the middle, and by 
torches along the walls, and it was full of goblins. They 
all laughed and stamped and clapped their hands, when 
the dwarves (with poor little Bi fDo at the back and 
nearest to the whips) came running in, while the goblin- 
drivers whooped and cracked their whips behind. The 
ponies were already there huddled m a corner; and there 
were all the baggages and packages lying broken open, 
and being rummaged by goblins, and smelt by goblins, 
and fingered by goblins, and quarrelled over by goblins. 

I am afraid that was the last they ever saw of those 
excellent little ponies, including a jolly sturdy little 
white fellow that Elrond had lent to Gandalf, since his 
horse was not suitable for the mountain-paths. For gob¬ 
lins eat horses and ponies and donkeys (and other much 
more dreadful things), and they are always hungry. Just 
now however the prisoners were thinking only of them¬ 
selves. The goblins chained their hands behind their 
backs and linked them all together in a line, and dragged 
them to the far end of the cavern with little Bilbo tug¬ 
ging at the end of the row. 

There in the shadows on a large flat stone sat a tre¬ 
mendous goblin with a huge head, and armed goblins 
were standing round him carrying the axes and the bent 
swords that they use. Now goblins are cruel, wicked, and 
bad-hearted. They make no beautiful things, but they 
make many clever ones. They can tunnel and mine as 
well as any but the most skilled dwarves, when they take 
the trouble, though they are usually untidy and dirty. 
Hammers, axes, swords, daggers, pickaxes, tongs, and also 
instruments of torture, they make very well, or get other 
people to make to their design, prisoners and slaves that 
have to work till they die for want of air and light. It is 
not unlikely that they invented some of the machines 
that have since troubled the world, especially the 

57 



THE HOBBIT 


ingenious devices for killing large numbers of people at 
once, for wheels and engines and explosions always de¬ 
lighted them, and also not working with their own hands 
more than they could help; but in those days and those 
wild parts they had not advanced (as it is called) so far. 
They did not hate dwarves especially, no more than they 
hated everybody and everything, and particularly the 
orderly and prosperous; in some parts wicked dwarves 
had even made alliances with them. But they had a 
special grudge against Thorin’s people, because of the 
war which you have heard mentioned, but which does 
not come into this tale; and anyway goblins don't care 
who they catch, as long as it is done smart and secret, and 
the prisoners are not able to defend themselves. 

‘Who are these miserable persons?' said the Great 
Goblin. 

‘Dwarves, and this I ’ said one of the drivers, pulling at 
Bilbo's chain so that he fell forward onto his knees. ‘We 
found them sheltering in our Front Porch.' 

‘What do you mean by it?' said the Great Goblin turn¬ 
ing to Thorin. ‘Up to no good, I'll warrant! Spying on 
the private business of my people, I guess! Thieves, I 
shouldn't be surprised to learn! Murderers and friends of 
Elves, not unlikely! Come! What have you got to say?' 

‘Thorin the dwarf at your service!' he replied ~ it was 
merely a polite nothing. ‘Of the things which you suspect 
and imagine we had no idea at all. We sheltered from a 
storm in what seemed a convenient cave and unused; 
nothing was further from our thoughts than incon¬ 
veniencing goblins in any way whatever.' That was true 
enough! 

‘Um! ’ said the Great Goblin. ‘So you say! Might I ask 
what you were doing up in the mountains at all, and 
where you were coming from, and where you were going 
to? In fact I should like to know all about you. Not that 
it will do you much good, Thorin Oakenshield, I know 
too much about your folk already; but let's have the 

58 



OVER HILL AND UNDER HILL 

truth, or I will prepare something particularly uncom¬ 
fortable for you! * 

‘We were on a journey to visit our relatives, our 
nephews and nieces, and first, second, and third cousins, 
and the other descendants of our grandfathers, who live 
on the East side of these truly hospitable mountains,' said 
Thorin, not quite knowing what v* say all at once in a 
moment, when obviously the exact iruth would not do at 
all. 

‘He is a liar, O truly tremendous one! * said one of the 
drivers. ‘Several of our people were struck by lightning in 
the cave, when we invited these creatures to come below; 
and they are as dead as stones. Also he has not explained 
this! ’ He held out the sword which Thorin had worn, the 
sword which came from the Trolls' lair. 

The Great Goblin gave a truly awful howl of rage 
when he looked at it, and all his soldiers gnashed their 
teeth, clashed their shields, and stamped. They knew the 
sword at once. It had killed hundreds of goblins in its 
time, when the fair elves of Gondolin hunted them in the 
hills or did battle before their walls. They had called it 
Orcrist, Goblin-cleaver, but the goblins called it simply 
Biter. They hated it and hated worse any one that 
carried it. 

‘Murderers and elf-friends!' the Great Goblin shouted. 
‘Slash them! Beat them! Bite them! Gnash them! Take 
them away to dark holes full of snakes, and never let 
them see the light again!' He was in such a rage that he 
jumped off his seat and himself rushed at Thorin with 
his mouth open. 

Just at that moment all the lights in the cavern went 
out, and the great fire went off poof! into a tower of blue 
glowing smoke, right up to the roof, that scattered pierc¬ 
ing white sparks all among the goblins. 

The yells and yammering, croaking, jibbering and 
jabbering; howls, growls and curses; shrieking and skrik- 
ing, that followed were beyond description. Several hun- 

59 



THE HOBBIT 


dred wild cats and wolves being roasted slowly alive to 
gether would not have compared with it. The sparks were 
burning holes in the goblins, and the smoke that now fell 
from the roof made the air too thick for even their eyes to 
see through. Soon they were falling over one another and 
rolling in heaps on the floor, biting and kicking and 
fighting as if they had all gone mad. 

Suddenly a sword flashed in its own light. Bilbo saw it 
go right through the Great Goblin as he stood dumb¬ 
founded in the middle of his rage. He fell dead, and the 
goblin soldiers fled before the sword shrieking into the 
darkness. 

The sword went back into its sheath. ‘Follow me 
quick! * said a voice fierce and quiet; and before Bilbo 
understood what had happened he was trotting along 
again, as fast as he could trot, at the end of the line, down 
more dark passages with the yells of the goblin-hall grow¬ 
ing fainter behind him. A pale light was leading them 
on. 

‘Quicker, quicker!’ said the voice. ‘The torches will 
soon be relit.’ 

‘Half a minute!' said Dori, who was at the back next to 
Bilbo, and a decent fellow. He made the hobbit scramble 
on his shoulders as best he could with his tied hands, and 
then off they all went at a run, with a clink-clink of 
chains, and many a stumble, since they had no hands to 
steady themselves with. Not for a long while did they 
stop, and by that time they must have been right down in 
the very mountain’s heart. 

Then Gandalf lit up his wand. Of course it was Gan- 
dalf; but just then they were too busy to ask how he got 
there. He took out his sword again, and again it flashed 
in the dark by itself. It burned with a rage that made it 
gleam if goblins were about; now it was bright as blue 
flame for delight in the killing of the great lord of the 
cave. It made no trouble whatever of cutting through the 
goblin-chains and setting all the prisoners free as quickly 

6o 



OVER HILL AND UNDER HILL 

as possible. This sword’s name was Glamdring the Foe- 
hammer, if you remember. The goblins just called it 
Beater, and hated it w’orse than Biter if possible. Orcrist, 
too, had been saved; for Gandalf had brought it along as 
well, snatching it from one of the terrified guards. Gan¬ 
dalf thought of most things; and though he could not do 
everything, he could do a great deal for friends in a tight 
corner. 

‘Are we all here?’ said he, handing his sword back to 
Thorin with a bow. ‘Let me see: one ~ that’s Thorin; 
two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven; 
where are Fili and Kili? Here they are! twelve, thirteen - 
and here’s Mr. Baggins: fourteen! Well, well! it might 
be worse, and then again it might be a good deal better. 
No ponies, and no food, and no knowing quite where we 
are, and hordes of angry goblins just behind! On we go!' 

On they went. Gandalf was quite right: they began to 
hear goblin noises and horrible cries far behind in the 
passages they had come through. That sent them on 
faster than ever, and as poor Bilbo could not possibly go 
half as fast - for dwarves can roll along at a tremendous 
pace, I can tell you, when they have to - they took it in 
turn to carry him on their backs. 

Still goblins go faster than dwarves, and these goblins 
knew the way better (they had made the paths them¬ 
selves), and were madly angry; so that do what they could 
the dwarves heard the cries and howls getting closer and 
closer. Soon they could hear even the flap of the goblin 
feet, many many feet which seemed only just round the 
last corner. The blink of red torches could be seen be¬ 
hind them in the tunnel they were following; and they 
were getting deadly tired. 

‘Why, O why did I ever leave my hobbit-hole I ’ said 
poor Mr. Baggins bumping up and down on Bombur’s 
back. 

‘Why, O why did I ever bring a wretched little hobbit 
on a treasure hunt! ’ said poor Bombur, who was fat, and 

6i 



THE HOBBIT 


Staggered along with the sweat dripping down his nose in 
his heat and terror. 

At this point Gandalf fell behind, and Thorin with 
him. They turned a sharp corner. ‘About turnl* he 
shouted. ‘Draw your sword Thorin I' 

There was nothing else to be done; and the goblins did 
not like it. They came scurrying round the corner in full 
cry, and found Goblin-cleaver, and Foe-hammer shining 
cold and bright right in their astonished eyes. The ones 
in front dropped their torches and gave one yell before 
they were killed. The ones behind yelled still more, and 
leaped back knocking over those that were running after 
them ‘Biter and Beater!* they shrieked; and soon they 
were all in confusion, and most of them were hustling 
back the way they had come. 

It was quite a long while before any of them dared to 
turn that corner. By that time the dwarves had gone on 
again, a long, long, way on into the dark tunnels of the 
goblins* realm. When the goblins discovered that, they 
put out their torches and they slipped on soft shoes, and 
they chose out their very quickest runners with the 
sharpest ears and eyes. These ran forward, as swift as 
weasels in the dark, and with hardly any more noise than 
bats. 

That is why neither Bilbo, nor the dwarves, nor even 
Gandalf heard them coming. Nor did they see them. But 
they were seen by the goblins that ran silently up behind, 
for Gandalf was letting his wand give out a faint light to 
help the dwarves as they went along. 

Quite suddenly Dori, now at the back again carrying 
Bilbo, was grabbed from behind in the dark. He shouted 
and fell; and the hobbit rolled off his shoulders into the 
blackness, bumped his head on hard rock, and remem¬ 
bered nothing more. 


6 « 



5 Riddles in the dark 

When Bilbo opened his eyes, he wondered if he had; for 
it was just as dark as with them ^hut. No one was any¬ 
where near him. Just imagine his fright I He could hear 
nothing, see nothing, and he could feel nothing except 
the stone of the floor. 

Very slowly he got up and groped about on all fours, 
till he touched the wall of the tunnel; but neither up nor 
down it could he find anything: nothing at all, no sign of 
goblins, no sign of dwarves. His head was swimming, and 
he was far from certain even of the direction they had 
been going in when he had his fall. He guessed as well as 
he could, and crawled along for a good way, till sud¬ 
denly his hand met what felt like a tiny ring of cold 
metal lying on the floor of the tunnel. It was a turning 
point in his career, but he did not know it. He put the 
ring in his pocket almost without thinking; certainly it 
did not seem of any particular use at the moment. He did 
not go much further, but sat down on the cold floor and 
gave himself up to complete miserableness, for a long 
while. He thought of himself frying bacon and eggs in his 
own kitchen at home - for he could feel inside that it was 
high time for some meal or other; but that only made 
him miserabler. 

He could not think what to do; nor could he think 
what had happened; or why he had been left behind; 
or why, if he had been left behind, the goblins had 
not caught him; or even why his head was so sore. The 
truth was he had been lying quiet, out of sight 
and out of mind, in a very dark corner for a long 
while. 

After some time he felt for his pipe. It was not broken, 
and that was something. Then he felt for his pouch, and 

63 



THE HOBBIT 


there was some tobacco in it, and that was something 
more. Then he felt for matches and he could not find any 
at all, and that shattered his hopes completely. Just as 
well for him, as he agreed when he came to his senses. 
Goodness knows what the striking of matches and the 
, smell of tobacco would have brought on him out of dark 
holes in that horrible place. Still at the moment he felt 
very crushed. But in slapping all his pockets and feeling 
all round himself for matches his hand came on the hilt 
of his little sword - the little dagger that he got from the 
trolls, and that he had quite forgotten; nor fortunately 
had the goblins noticed it, as he wore it inside his 
breeches. 

Now he drew it out. It shone pale and dim before his 
eyes. ‘So it is an elvish blade, too,’ he thought; ‘and 
goblins are not very near, and yet not far enough.’ 

But somehow he was comforted. It was rather splendid 
to be wearing a blade made in Gondolin for the goblin- 
wars of which so many songs had sung; and also he had 
noticed that such weapons made a great impression on 
goblins that came upon them suddenly. 

‘Go back?’ he thought. ‘No good at alll Go sideways? 
Impossible! Go forward? Only one thing to do! On we 
go! ’ So up he got, and trotted along with his little sword 
held in front of him and one hand feeling the wall, and 
his heart all of a patter and a pitter. 

Now certainly Bilbo was in what is called a tight place. 
But you must remember it was not quite so tight for him 
as it would have been for me or for you. Hobbits are not 
quite like ordinary people; and after all if their holes are 
nice cheery places and properly aired, quite different 
from the tunnels of the goblins, still they are more used 
to tunnelling than we are, and they do not easily lose 
their sense of 'direction underground - not when their 
heads have recovered from being bumped. Also they can 
move very quietly, and hide easily, and recover wonder- 

64 



RIDDLES IN THE DARK 

fully from falls and bruises, and they have a fund of wis¬ 
dom and wise sayings that men have mostly never heard 
or have forgotten long ago. 

I should not have liked to have been in Mr. Baggins* 
place, all the same. The tunnel sremed to have no end. 
All he knew was that it was still going down pretty, 
steadily and keeping in the same direction in spite of a 
twist and a turn or two. There were passages leading off 
to the side every now and then, as he knew by the 
glimmer of his sword, or could feel with his hand on the 
wall. Of these he took no notice, except to hurry past for 
fear of goblins or half-imagined dark things coming out 
of them. On and on he went, and down and down; and 
still he heard no sound of anything except the occasional 
whirr of a bat by his ears, which startled him at first, till it 
became too frequent to bother about. I do not know how 
long he kept on like this, hating to go on, not daring to 
stop, on, on, until he was tireder than tired. It seemed 
like all the way to tomorrow and over it to the days 
beyond. 

Suddenly without any warning he trotted splash into 
water! Ugh! It was icy cold. That pulled him up sharp 
and short. He did not know whether it was just a pool in 
the path, or the edge of an underground stream that 
crossed the passage, or the brink of a deep dark subter¬ 
ranean lake. The sword was hardly shining at all. 
He stopped, and he could hear, when he listened hard, 
drops drip-drip-dripping from an unseen roof into 
the water below; but there seemed no other sort of 
sound. 

*So it is a pool or a lake, and not an underground 
river,' he thought. Still he did not dare to wade out into 
the darkness. He could not swim; and he thought, too, of 
nasty slimy things, with big bulging blind eyes, wriggling 
in the water. There are strange things living in the pools 
and lakes in the hearts of mountains: fish whose fathers 
swam in, goodness only knows how many years ago, and 

65 



THE HOBBIT 


never swam out again, while their eyes grew bigger and 
bigger and bigger from trying to see in the blackness; also 
there are other things more slimy than fish. Even in the 
tunnels and caves the goblins have made for themselves 
there are other things living unbeknown to them that 
have sneaked in from outside to lie up in the dark. Some 
of these caves, too, go back in their beginnings to ages 
before the goblins, who only widened them and joined 
them up with passages, and the original owners are still 
there in odd corners, slinking and nosing about. 

Deep down here by the dark water lived old Gollum, a 
small slimy creature. I don’t know where he came from, 
nor who or what he was. He was Gollum - as dark as 
darkness, except for two big round pale eyes in his thin 
face. He had a little boat, and he rowed about quite 
quietly on the lake; for lake it was, wide and deep and 
deadly cold. He paddled it with large feet dangling over 
the side, but never a ripple did he make. Not he. He was 
looking out of his pale limp-like eyes for blind fish, which 
he grabbed with his long fingers as quick as thinking. He 
liked meat too. Goblin he thought good, when he could 
get it; but he took care they never found him out. He just 
throttled them from behind, if they ever came down 
alone anywhere near the edge of the water, while he was 
prowling about. They very seldom did, for they had a 
feeling that something unpleasant was lurking down 
there, down at the very roots of the mountain. They had 
come on the lake, when they were tunnelling down long 
ago, and they found they could go no further; so there 
their road ended in that direction, and there was no 
reason to go that way - unless the Great Goblin sent 
them. Sometimes he took a fancy for fish from the lake, 
and sometimes neither goblin nor fish came back. 

Actually Gollum lived on a slimy island of rock in the 
middle of the lake. He was watching Bilbo now from the 
distance with his pale eyes like telescopes. Bilbo could 
not see him, but he was wondering a lot about Bilbo, 

66 



RIDDLES IN THE DARK 

for he could see that he was no goblin at all. 

Gollum got into his boat and sl^ot off from the island, 
while Bilbo was sitting on the brink altogether flum¬ 
moxed and at the end of his way and his wits. Suddenly 
up came Gollum and whispered and hissed: 

‘Bless us and splash us, my pn cioussss! I guess it's a 
choice feast; at least a tasty morsel it'd make us, gollum I ’ 
And when he said gollum he mad<f a horrible swallowing 
noise in his throat. That is how hf? got his name, though 
he always called himself ‘my precious'. 

The hobbit jumped nearly out of his skin when the 
hiss came in his ears, and he suddenly saw the pale eyes 
sticking out at him. 

‘Who are you?' he said, thrusting his dagger in front of 
him. 

‘What iss he, my preciouss?' whispered Gollum (who 
always spoke to himself through never having anyone else 
to speak to). This is what he had come to find out, for he 
was not really very hungry at the moment, only curious; 
otherwise he would have grabbed first and whispered 
afterwards. 

‘I am Mr, Bilbo Baggins. I have lost the dwarves and I 
have lost the wizard, and I don't know where I am; and I 
don't want to know, if only I can get away.' 

‘What's he got in his handses?' said Gollum, looking at 
the sword, which he did not quite like. 

‘A sword, a blade which came out of Gondolin I' 

‘Sssss,' said Gollum, and became quite polite. ‘Praps ye 
sits here and chats with it a bitsy, my preciousss. It like 
riddles, praps it does, does it?' He was anxious to appear 
friendly, at any rate for the moment, and until he found 
out more about the sword and the hobbit, whether he 
was quite alone really, whether he was good to eat, and 
whether Gollum was really hungry. Riddles were all he 
could think of. Asking them, and sometimes guessing 
them, had b^en the only game he had ever played with 
other funny creatures sitting in their holes in the long, 

67 



THE HOBBIT 


long ago, before he lost all his friends and was driven 
away, alone, and crept down, down, into the dark under 
the mountains. 

‘Very well,* said Bilbo, who was anxious to agree, until 
he found out more about the creature, whether he was 
•quite alone, whether he was fierce or hungry, and 
whether he was a friend of the goblins. 

‘You ask first,’ he said, because he had not had time to 
think of a riddle. 

So Gollum hissed: 

What has roots as nobody sees, 

Is taller than trees. 

Up, up it goes. 

And yet never groius? 

‘Easyl* said Bilbo. ‘Mountain, I suppose.* 

‘Does it guess easy? It must have a competition with us, 
my preciouss! If precious asks, and it doesn’t answer, we 
eats it, my preciousss. If it asks us, and we doesn’t answer 
then we does what it wants, eh? We shows it the way out, 
yes! ’ 

‘All right!’ said Bilbo, not daring to disagree, and 
nearly bursting his brain to think of riddles that could 
save him from being eaten. 

Thirty white horses on a red hill. 

First they champ, 

Then they stamp. 

Then they stand still. 

That was all he could think of to ask - the idea of eating 
was rather on his mind. It was rather an old one, too, and 
Gollum knew the answer as well as you do. 

‘Chestnuts, chestnuts,’ he hissed. ‘Teeth! teeth! my 
preciousss; but we has only six!’ Then he asked his 
second: 


68 



RIDDLES IN THE DARK 

Voiceless it cries 
Windless flutters. 

Toothless bites. 

Mouthless multe 's, 

‘Half a moment!’ cried Bilbo, ' ^ho was still thinking 
uncomfortably about eating. Fonunately he had once 
heard something rather like this before, and getting his 
wits back he thought of the answer. ‘Wind, wind of 
course,’ he said, and he was so pleased that he made up 
one on the spot. ‘This’ll puzzle the nasty little under¬ 
ground creature,’ he thought: 

A 71 eye in a blue fare 
Saiu an eye in a green face. 

'That eye is like to this eye* 

Said the first eye, 

'But in low place. 

Not in high place.* 

*Ss, ss, ss,* said Gollum. He had been underground a 
long long time, and was forgetting this sort of thing. But 
just as Bilbo was beginning to hope that the wretch 
would not be able to answer, Gollum brought up 
memories of ages and ages and ages before, when he lived 
with his grandmother in a hole in a bank by a river, ‘Sss, 
sss, my preciouss,' he said. ‘Sun on the daisies it means, it 
does.’ 

But these ordinary aboveground everyday sort of 
riddles were tiring for him. Also they reminded him of 
days when he had been less lonely and sneaky and nasty, 
and that put him out of temper. What is more they made 
him hungry; so this time he tried something a bit more 
dfficult and more unpleasant: 

It cannot be seen, cannot be felt, 

Cannot be heard, cannot be smelt. 

It lies behind stars and under hills 

69 



THE HOBBIT 


And empty holes its fills 
It comes first and follows after, 

^nds life, kills laughter. 

Unfortunately for Gollum Bilbo had heard that sort of 
thing before; and the answer was all round him any way. 
‘Dark I ’ he said without even scratching his head or put¬ 
ting on his thinking cap. 

A box without hinges, key, or lidl 
Yet golden treasure inside is hid, 

he asked to gain time, until he could think of a really 
hard one. This he thought a dreadfully easy chestnut, 
though he had not asked it in the usual words. But it 
proved a nasty poser for Gollum. He hissed to himself, 
and still he did not answer; he whispered and spluttered. 

After some while Bilbo became impatient. ‘Well, what 
is it?’ he said. ‘The answer’s not a kettle boiling over, as 
you seem to think from the noise you are making.’ 

‘Give us a chance; let it give us a chance, my preciouss 
~ ss - ss.’ 

‘Well,’ said Bilbo, after giving him a long chance, 
‘what about your guess?’ 

But suddenly Gollum remembered thieving from nests 
long ago, and sitting under the river bank teaching his 
grandmother, teaching his grandmother to suck - 
‘Eggses!’ he hissed. ‘Eggses it is!’ Then he asked: 

Alive without breath, 

As cold as death; 

Never thirsty, ever drinking. 

All in mail never clinking. 

He also in his turn thought this was a dreadfully easy 
one, because he was always thinking of the answer. But 
he could not remember anything better at the moment, 
he was so flustered by the egg-question. All the same it 

70 



RIDDLES IN THE DARK 

was a poser for poor Bilbo, who ne\ er had anything to do 
with the water if he could help it I imagine you know 
the answer, of course, or can guess it as easy as winking, 
since you are sitting comfortably at home and have not 
the danger of being eaten to disturb your thinking. Bilbo 
sat and cleared his throat once or twice, but no answer 
came. 

After a while Gollum began to hiss with pleasure to 
himself: ‘Is it nice, my preciousss? Is it juicy? Is it 
scrumptiously crunchable?* He began to peer at Bilbo 
out of the darkness. 

‘Half a moment,* said the hobbit shivering. ‘I gave you 
a good long chance just now.* 

‘It must make haste, haste! * said Gollum, beginning to 
climb out of his boat on to the shore to get at Bilbo. But 
when he put his long webby foot in the water, a fish 
jumped out in a fright and fell on Bilbo’s toes. 

‘UghI* he said, ‘it is cold and clammy!* - and so he 
guessed. ‘Fish! fish!* he cried. ‘It is fish!’ 

Gollum was dreadfully disappointed; but Bilbo asked 
another riddle as quick as ever he could, so that Gollum 
had to get back into his boat and think. 

No-legs lay on one-leg, two-legs sat near on three-legs, 
four-legs got some. 

It was not really the right time for this riddle, but 
Bilbo was in a hurry. Gollum might have had some 
trouble guessing it, if he had asked it at another time. As 
it was, talking of fish, ‘no-legs’ was not so very difficult, 
and after that the rest was easy. ‘Fish on a little table, 
naan at table sitting on a stool, the cat has the bones’ that 
of course is the answer, and Gollum soon gave it. Then 
he thought the time had come to ask something hard and 
horrible. This is what he said: 

This thing all things devours: 

Birds, beasts, trees, flowers 

Gnaws iron, bites steel; 

71 



THE HOBBIT 


Grinds hard stones to meal; 

Slays king, ruins town. 

And beats high mountain down. 

Poor Bilbo sat in the dark thinking of all the horrible 
names of all the giants and ogres he had ever heard told 
of in tales, but not one of them had done all these things. 
He had a feeling that the answer was quite different and 
that he ought to know it, but he could not think of it. He 
began to get frightened, and that is bad for thinking. 
Gollum began to get out of his boat. He flapped into the 
water and paddled to the bank; Bilbo could see his eyes 
coming towards him. His tongue seemed to stick in his 
mouth; he wanted to shout out: ‘Give me more time! 
Give me time I ’ But all that came out with a sudden 
squeal was: 


‘Time! Time!* 

Bilbo was saved by pure luck. For that of course was 
the answer. 

Gollum was disappointed once more; and now he was 
getting angry, and also tired of the game. It had made 
him very hungry indeed. This time he did not go back to 
the boat. He sat down in the dark by Bilbo.That made 
the hobbit most dreadfully uncomfortable and scattered 
his wits. 

‘It's got to ask uss a quesstion, my preciouss, yes, yess, 
yesss. Just one more question to guess, yes, yess,' said 
Gollum. 

But Bilbo simply could not think of any question with 
that nasty wet cold thing sitting next to him, and pawing 
and poking him. He scratched himself, he pinched him¬ 
self; still he could not think of anything. 

‘Ask usl Ask usl’ said Gollum. 

Bilbo pinched himself and slapped himself; he gripped 
on his little sword; he even felt in his pocket with his 

7 * 



RIDDLES IN THE DARK 

Other hand. There he found the rin r he had picked up in 
the passage and forgotten about. 

‘What have I got in my pocket?' lie said aloud. He was 
talking to himself, but Gollum thnught it was a riddle, 
and he was frightfully upset. 

‘Not fair! Not fair!’ he hissed. ‘It isn’t fair, my 
precious, is it, to ask us what it’s ;ot in its nassty little 
pocketses?’ 

Bilbo seeing what had happened and having nothing 
better to ask stuck to his question, ‘What have I got in my 
pocket?’ he said louder. 

‘S-s-s-s-s,’ hissed Gollum. ‘It must give us three guesseses, 
my preciouss, three guesseses.” 

‘Very well! Guess away!’ said Bilbo. 

‘Handses!* said Gollum. 

‘Wrong,’ said Bilbo, who had luckily just taken his 
hand out again. ‘Guess again! ’ 

‘S-s-s-s-s,’ said Gollum more upset than ever. He 
thought of all the things he kept in his own pockets: fish¬ 
bones, goblins’ teeth, wet shells, a bit of bat-wing, a sharp 
stone to sharpen his fangs on, and other nasty things. He 
tried to think what other people kept in their pockets. 

‘Knife!’ he said at last. 

‘Wrong!’ said Bilbo, who had lost his some time ago. 
‘Last guess! ’ 

Now Gollum was in a much worse state than when 
Bilbo had asked him the egg-question. He hissed and 
spluttered and rocked himself backwards and forwards, 
and slapped his feet on the floor, and wriggled and 
squirmed; but still he did not dare to waste his last guess. 

‘Come on!' said Bilbo. ‘I am waiting!’ He tried to 
sound bold and cheerful, but he did not feel at all sure 
how the game was going to end, whether Gollum guessed 
right or not. 

‘Time’s up! ’ he said. 

‘String, or nothing!’ shrieked Gollum, which was not 
quite fair - working in two guesses at once. 

73 



THE HOBBIT 


‘Both wrong/ cried Bilbo very much relieved; and he 
jumped at once to his feet, put his back to the nearest 
wall, and held out his little sword. He knew, of course, 
that the riddle-game was sacred and of immense an¬ 
tiquity, and even wicked creatures were afraid to cheat 
when they played at it. But he felt he could not trust this 
slimy thing to keep any promise at a pinch. Any excuse 
would do for him to slide out of it. And after all that last 
question had not been a genuine riddle according to the 
ancient laws. 

But at any rate Gollum did not at once attack him. He 
could see the sword in Bilbo's hand. He sat still, shivering 
and whispering. At last Bilbo could wait no longer. 

‘Well?* he said. ‘What about your promise? I want to 
go. You must show me the way.* 

‘Did we say so, precious? Show the nassty little Baggins 
the way out, yes, yes. But what has it got in its pocketses, 
eh? Not string, precious, but not nothing. Oh no! 
Gollum! * 

‘Never you mind,* said Bilbo. ‘A promise is a promise.* 

‘Cross it is, impatient, precious/ hissed Gollum. ‘But it 
must wait, yes it must. We can’t go up the tunnels so 
hasty. We must go and get some things first, yes, things to 
help us.* 

‘Well, hurry up! * said Bilbo, relieved to think of 
Gollum going away. He thought he was just making an 
excuse and did not mean to come back. What was Gol¬ 
lum talking about? What useful thing could he keep out 
on the dark lake? But he was wrong. Gollum did mean to 
come back. He was angry now and hungry. And he was a 
miserable wicked creature, and already he had a plan. 

Not far away was his fsland, of which Bilbo knew noth¬ 
ing, and there in his hiding-place he kept a few wretched 
oddments, and one very beautful thing, very beautiful, 
very wonderful. He had a ring, a golden ring, a precious 
ring. 

‘My birthday-present 1 * he whispered to himself, as he 

74 



RIDDLES IN THE DARK 

had often done in the endless dark days. ‘That’s what we 
wants now, yes; we wants it!’ 

He wanted it because it was a rin ^ of pow^r, and if you 
slipped that ring on your finger, you were invisible; only 
in the full sunlight could you be se en, and then only by 
your shadow, and that would be shaky and faint. 

‘My birthday-present! It came t > me on my birthday, 
my precious.’ So he had always said to himself. But who 
knows how Gollum came by that present, ages ago in the 
old days when such rings were still at large in the world? 
Perhaps even the Master who ruled them could not have 
said. Gollum used to wear it at first, till it tired him; and 
then he kept it in a pouch next to his skin, till it galled 
him; and now usually he hid it in a hole in the rock on 
his island, and was always going back to look at it. And 
still sometimes he put it on, when he could not bear to be 
parted from it any longer, or when he was very, very, 
hungry, and tired of fish. Then he would creep along 
dark passages looking for stray goblins. He might even 
venture into places where the torches were lit and made 
his eyes blink and smart; for he would be safe. Oh yes, 
quite safe. No one would see him, no one would notice 
him, till he had his fingers on their throat. Only a few 
hours ago he had worn it, and caught a small goblin-imp. 
How it squeaked! He still had a bone or two left to 
gnaw, but he wanted something softer. 

‘Quite safe, yes.’ he whispered to himself. ‘It won’t see 
us, will it, my precious? No. It won’t see us, and its nassty 
little sword will be useless, yes quite.’ 

That is what was in his wicked little mind, as he 
slipped suddenly from Bilbo’s side, and flapped back to 
his boat, and went off into the dark. Bilbo thought he 
had heard the last of him. Still he waited a while; for he 
had no idea how to find his way out alone. 

Suddenly he heard a screech. It sent a shiver down his 
back. Gollum was cursing and wailing away in the gloom, 
not very far off by the sound of it. He was on his island, 
‘ 75 



THE HOBBIT 

scrabbling here and there, searching and seeking in vain. 

‘Where is it? Where iss it?' Bilbo heard hipi crying. 
‘Losst it is, my precious, lost, lost! Curse us and crush us, 
my precious is lost! / 

‘What's the matter?’ Bilbo called. ‘What have you 
lost?' 

‘It mustn't ask us,' shrieked Gollum. ‘Not its business, 
no, gollum! It's losst, gollum, gollum, gollum.* 

‘Well, so am I,' cried Bilbo, ‘and I want to get unlost. 
And I won the game, and you promised. So come along! 
Come and let me out, and then go on with your looking! ’ 
Utterly miserable as Gollum sounded, Bilbo could not 
find much pity in his heart, and he had a feeling that 
anything Gollum wanted so much could hardly be some¬ 
thing good. ‘Come along!’ he shouted. 

‘No, not yet, precious!’ Gollum answered. ‘We must 
search for it, it's lost, gollum.’ 

‘But you never guessed my last question, and you 
promised,’ said Bilbo. 

‘Never guessed! ’ said Gollum. Then suddenly out of 
the gloom came a sharp hiss. ‘What has it got in its 
pocketses? Tell us that. It must tell first.' 

As far as Bilbo knew, there was no particular reason 
why he should not tell. Gollum’s mind had jumped to a 
guess quicker than his; naturally, for Gollum had 
brooded for ages on this one thing, and he was always 
afraid of its being stolen. But Bilbo was annoyed at the de¬ 
lay. After all, he had won the game, pretty fairly, at a hor¬ 
rible risk. ‘Answers were to be guessed not given,' he said. 

‘But it wasn’t a fair question,’ said Gollum. ‘Not a 
riddle, precious, no,’ 

‘Oh well, if it’s a matter of ordinary questions,’ Bilbo 
repled, ‘then I asked one first. What have you lost? Tell 
me that I ’ 

‘What has it got in its pocketses?’ The sound came hiss¬ 
ing louder and sharper, and as he looked towards it, to 
his alarm Bilbo now saw two small points of light peering 

76 



RIDDI.RS IN THE DARK 

at him. As suspicion grew in Gollum’s mind, the light of 
his eyes burned with a pale flame. 

‘What have you lost?* Bilbo persisted. 

But now the light in Gollum’s e)es had become a green 
(ire, and it was coming swiftly neaier. Gollum was in his 
boat again, paddling wildly back to the dark shore; and 
such a rage of loss and suspicion w is in his heart that no 
sword had any more terror for him. 

Bilbo could not guess what had maddened the 
wretched creature, but he saw' that all w'as up, and that 
Gollum meant to murder him at any rate. Just in time he 
turned and ran blindly back up the dark passage down 
which he had come, keeping close to the wall and feeling 
it with his left hand. 

‘What has it got in its pocketses?’ he heard the hiss 
loud behind him, and the splash as Gollum leapt from 
his boat. ‘What have I, I wonder?' he said to himself, as 
he panted and stumbled along. He put his left hand in 
his pocket. The ring felt very cold as it quietly slipped on 
to his groping forefinger. 

The hiss was close behind him. He turned now and saw 
Gollum’s eyes like small green lamps coming up the 
slope. Terrified he tried to run faster, but suddenly he 
struck his toes on a snag in the floor, and fell flat with his 
little sword under him. 

In a moment Gollum was on him. But before Bilbo 
could do anything, recover his breath, pick himself up, or 
wave his sword, Gollum passed by, taking no notice of 
him, cursing and whispering as he ran. 

What could it mean? Gollum could see in the dark. 
Bilbo could see the light of his eyes palely shining even 
from behind. Painfully he got up, and sheathed his 
sword, which was not glowing faintly again, then very 
cautiously he followed. There seemed nothing else to do. 
It was no good crawling back down to Gollum's water. 
Perhaps if he followed him, Gollum might lead him to 
some way of escape without meaning to. 

77 



THE HOBBIT 


‘Curse it I curse it! curse it! * hissed Gollum. ‘Curse the 
BagginsI It's gone! What has it got in its pocketses? Oh 
we guess, we guess, my precious. He’s found it, yes he 
must have. My birthday-present.’ 

Bilbo pricked up his ears. He was at last beginning to 
guess himself. He hurried a little, getting as close as he 
dared behind Gollum, who was still going quickly, not 
looking back, but turning his head from side to side, as 
Bilbo could see from the faint glimmer on the walls. 

‘My birthday-present! Curse it! How did we lose it, 
my precious? Yes, that’s it. When we came this way last, 
when we twisted that nassty young squeaker. That’s it. 
Curse it! It slipped from us, after all these ages and ages! 
It’s gone, gollum.* 

Suddenly Gollum sat down and began to weep, a 
whistling and gurgling sound horrible to listen to. Bilbo 
halted and flattened himself against the tunnel-wall. 
After a while Gollum stopped weeping and began to talk. 
He seemed to be having an argument with himself. 

‘It’s no good going back there to search, no. We doesn’t 
remember all the places we’ve visited. And it’s no use. 
The Baggins has got it in its pocketses; the nassty noser 
has found it, we says.* 

‘We guesses, precious, only guesses. We can’t know till 
we find the nassty creature and squeezes it. But it doesn't 
know what the present can do, does it? It’ll just keep it in 
its pocketses. It doesn’t know, and it can’t go far. It’s lost 
itself, the nassty nosey thing. It doesn’t know the way out. 
It said so.’ 

‘It said so, yes; but it’s tricksy. It doesn’t say what it 
means. It won’t say what it’s got in its pocketses. It knows. 
It knows a way in, it must know a way out, yes. It’s off to 
the back-door. To the back-door, that’s it.’ 

‘The goblinses will catch it then. It can’t get out that 
way, precious.' 

‘Ssss, sss, gollum! Goblinses! Yes, but if it’s got the 
present, our precious present, then goblinses will get it, 

78 



RIDDLES IN THE DARK 

gollum! They’ll find it, they’ll finil out what it does. We 
shan’t ever be safe again, never, gollumi One of the 
goblinses will put it on, and then no one will see him. 
He’ll be there but not seen. Not tiven our clever eyeses 
will notice him; and he’ll come cieepsy and tricksy and 
catch us, gollum, gollum 1 ’ 

‘Then let’s stop talking, precious, and make haste. If 
the Baggins has gone that way, we must go quick and see. 
Go! Not far now. Make haste!’ 

With a spring Gollum got up and started shambling 
off at a great pace. Bilbo hurried after him. still cauti¬ 
ously, though his chief fear now w^as of tripping on 
another snag and falling with a noise. His head was in a 
whirl of hope and wonder. It seemed that the ring he had 
was a magic ring: it made you invisible! He had heard 
of such things, of course, in old old tales; but it was hard 
to believe that he really had found one, by accident. Still 
there it was: Gollum with his bright eyes had passed him 
by, only a yard to one side. 

On they went, Gollum flip-flapping ahead, hissing and 
cursing; Bilbo behind going as softly as a hobbit can. 
Soon they came to places where, as Bilbo had noticed on 
the way down, side-passages opened, this way and that. 
Gollum began at once to count them. 

‘One left, yes. One right, yes. Two right, yes, yes. TWo 
left, yes, yes.’ And so on and on. 

As the count grew he slowed down, and he began to get 
shaky and weepy; for he was leaving the water further 
and further behind, and he was getting afraid. Goblins 
might be about, and he had lost his ring. At last he 
stopped by a low opening, on their left as they went 
up. 

‘Seven right, yes. Six left, yes! ’ he whispered. ‘This is it. 
This is the way to the back-door, yes. Here’s the passage! ’ 

He peered in, and shrank back. ‘But we durstn’t go on, 
precious, no we durstn’t. Goblinses down there. Lots of 
goblinses. We smells them. SsssI’ 

79 



THE HOBBIT 


‘What shall we do? Curse them and crush them! We 
must wait here, precious, wait a bit and see/ 

So they came to a dead stop. Gollum had brought 
Bilbo to the way out after all, but Bilbo could not get in! 
There was Gollum sitting humped up right in the open¬ 
ing, and his eyes gleamed cold in his head, as he swayed it 
from side to side between his knees. 

Bilbo crept away from the wall more quietly than a 
mouse; but Gollum stifl'ened at once, and sniffed, and his 
eyes went green. He hissed softly but menacingly. He 
could not see the hobbit, but now he was on the alert, 
and he had other senses that the darkness had sharp¬ 
ened: hearing and smell. He seemed to be crouched right 
down with his flat hands splayed on the floor, and his 
head thrust out, nose almost to the stone. Though he was 
only a black shadow in the gleam of his own eyes. Bilbo 
could see or feel that he was tense as a bowstring, gath¬ 
ered for a spring. 

Bilbo almost stopped breathing, and went stiff himself. 
He was desperate. He must get away, out of this horrible 
darkness, while he had any strength left. He must fight. 
He must stab the foul thing, put its eyes out, kill it. It 
meant to kill him. No, not a fair fight. He was invisible 
now. Gollum had no sword. Gollum had not actually 
threatened to kill him, or tried to yet. And he was miser¬ 
able, alone, lost. A sudden understanding, a pity mixed 
with horror, welled up in Bilbo's heart: a glimpse of 
endless unmarked days without light or hope of better¬ 
ment, hard stone, cold fish, sneaking and whispering. All 
these thoughts passed in a flash of a second. He trembled. 
And then quite suddenly in another flash, as if lifted by a 
new strength and resolve, he leaped. 

No great leap for a man, but a leap in the dark. 
Straight over Gollum's head he jumped, seven feet for¬ 
ward and three in the air; indeed, had he known it, he 
only just missed cracking his skull on the low arch of the 
passage. 


8o 



RIDDLES IN THE DARK 

Gollum threw himself backwards, and grabbed as the 
hobbit flew over him, but too late: his hands snapped on 
thin air, and Bilbo, falling fair on his sturdy feet, sped off 
down the new tunnel. He did not turn to see what 
Gollum was doing. There was a hissing and cursing 
almost as his heels at first, then it stopped. All at once 
there came a blood-curdling shrit k, filled with hatred 
and despair. Gollum was defeated. He dared go no 
further. He had lost: lost his prey, and lost, too, the only 
thing he had ever cared for, his precious. The cry brought 
Bilbo’s heart to his mouth, but still he held on. Now faint 
as an echo, but menacing, the voice came behind: 

‘Thief, thief, thief! Baggins! We hates it, we hates it, 
we hates it for ever 1 * 

Then there was a silence. But that too seemed 
menacing to Bilbo. If goblins are so near that he smelt 
them,* he thought, ‘then they’ll have heard his shrieking 
and cursing. Careful now, or this way will lead you to 
worse things.’ 

The passage was low and roughly made. It was not too 
difficult for the hobbit, except when, in spite of all care, 
he stubbed his poor toes again, several times, on nasty 
jagged stones in the floor. ‘A bit low for goblins, at least 
for the big ones,’ thought Bilbo, not knowing that even 
the big ones, the ores of the mountains, go along at a 
great speed stooping low with their hands almost on the 
ground. 

Soon the passage that had been sloping down began to 
go up again, and after a while it climbed steeply. That 
slowed Bilbo down. But at last the slope stopped, the 
passage turned a corner, and dipped down again, and 
there, at the bottom of a short incline, he saw, filtering 
round another corner - a glimpse of light. Not red light, 
as of fire, or lantern, but a pale out-of-doors sort of light. 
Then Bilbo began to run. 

Scuttling as fast as his legs would carry him he turned 
the last corner and came suddenly right into an open 

8i 



THE HOBBIT 


space, where the light, after all that time in the dark, 
seemed dazzlingly bright. Really it was only a leak of 
sunshine in through a doorway, where a great door, a 
stone door, was left standing open. 

Bilbo blinked, and then suddenly he saw the goblins: 
goblins in full armour with drawn swords sitting just in¬ 
side the door, and watching it with wide eyes, and watch¬ 
ing the passage that led to it. They were aroused, alert, 
ready for anything. 

They saw him sooner than he saw them. Yes, they saw 
him. Whether it was an accident, or a last trick of the 
ring before it took a new master, it was not on his finger. 
With yells of delight the goblins rushed upon him. 

A pang of fear and loss, like an echo of Gollum’s 
misery, smote Bilbo, and forgetting even to draw his 
sword he struck his hands into his pockets. And there was 
the ring still, in his left pocket, and it slipped on his 
finger. The goblins stopped short. They could not see a 
sign of him. He had vanished. They yelled twice as loud 
as before, but not so delightedly. 

‘Where is it?’ they cried. 

‘Go back up the passage I ’ some shouted. 

‘This way!’ some yelled. ‘That way!* others yelled. 

‘Look out for the door,’ bellowed the captain. 

Whistles blew, armour clashed, swords rattled, goblins 
cursed and swore and ran hither and thither, falling over 
one another and getting very angry. There was a terrible 
outcry, to-do, and disturbance. 

Bilbo was dreadfully frightened, but he had the sense 
to understand what had happened and to sneak behind a 
big barrel which held drink for the goblin-guards, and so 
get out of the way and avoid being bumped into, 
trampled to death, or caught by feel. 

‘I must get to the door, I must get to the door I ’ he kept 
on saying to himself, but it was a long time before he 
ventured to try. Then it was like a horrible game of blind- 
man’s-buff. The place was full of goblins running about, 

S2 



RIDDLES IN THE DARK 

and the poor little hobbit dodged this way and that, was 
knocked over by a goblin who couid not make out what 
he had bumped into, scrambled away on all fours, 
slipped between the legs of the captain just in time, got 
up, and ran for the door. 

It was still ajar, but a goblin ha»i pushed it nearly to. 
Bilbo struggled but he could not move it. He tried to 
squeeze through the crack. He squeezed and squeezed, 
and he stuck! It was awful. His buttons had got wedged 
on the edge of the door and the door-post. He could see 
outside into the open air: there were a few steps running 
down into a narrow valley between tall mountains; 
the sun came out from behind a cloud and shone 
bright on the outside of the door - but he could not get 
through. 

Suddenly one of the goblins inside shouted: ‘There is 
a shadow by the door. Something is outside! ‘ 

Bilbo’s heart jumped into his mouth. He gave a terrific 
squirm. Buttons burst off in all directions. He was 
through, with a torn coat and waistcoat, leaping down 
the steps like a goat, while bewildered goblins were still 
picking up his nice brass buttons on the doorstep. 

Of course they soon came down after him, hooting and 
hallooing, and hunting among the trees. But they don’t 
like the sun: it makes their legs wobble and their heads 
giddy. They could not find Bilbo with the ring on, slip¬ 
ping in and out of the shadow of the trees, running quick 
and quiet, and keeping out of the sun; so soon they went 
back grumbling and cursing to guard the door. Bilbo had 
escaped. 


8S 



6 Out of the frying-pan into the fire 

Bilbo had escaped the goblins, but he did not know 
where he was. He had lost hood, cloak, food, pony, his 
buttons and his friends. He wandered on and on, till the 
sun began to sink westwards - behind the mountains. 
Their shadows fell across Bilbo’s path, and he looked 
back. Then he looked forward and could see before him 
only ridges and slopes falling towards lowlands and 
plains glimpsed occasionally between the trees. 

‘Good heavens! * he exclaimed. ‘I seem to have got right 
to the other side of the Misty Mountains, right to the 
edge of the Land Beyond! Where and O where can 
Gandalf and the dwarves have got to? I only hope to 
goodness they are not still back there in the power of the 
goblins I ‘ 

He still wandered on, out of the little high valley, over 
its edge, and down the slopes beyond; but all the while a 
very uncomfortable thought was growing inside him. He 
wondered whether he ought not, now he had the magic 
ring, to go back into the horrible, horrible, tunnels and 
look for his friends. He had just made up his mind that it 
was his duty, that he must turn back - and very miserable 
he felt about it - when he heard voices. 

He stopped and listened. It did not sound like goblins; 
so he crept forward carefully. He was on a stony path 
winding downwards with a rocky wall on the left hand; 
on the other side the ground sloped away and there were 
dells below the level of the path overhung with bushes 
and low trees. In one of these dells under the bushes 
people were talking. 

He crept still nearer, and suddenly he saw peering 
between two big boulders a head with a red hood on: it 
was Balin doing look-out. He could have clapped and 

84 



OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN (NTO THE FIRE 

shouted for joy, but he did not. H<* had still got the ring 
on, for fear of meeting something unexpected and un¬ 
pleasant, and he saw that Balin v%as looking straight at 
him without noticing him. 

‘I will give them all a surprisi;,* he thought, as he 
crawled into the bushes at the ed,ce of the dell. Gandalf 
was arguing with the dwarves. They were discussing all 
that had happened to them in the tunnels, and wonder¬ 
ing and debating what they were t(» do now. The dwarves 
were grumbling, and Gandalf was saying that they could 
not possibly go on with their journey leaving Mr. Baggins 
in the hands of the goblins, without trying to find out 
if he was alive or dead, and without trying to rescue 
him. 

‘After all he is my friend,* said the wizard, ‘and not a 
bad little chap. I feel responsible for him. I wish to 
goodness you had not lost him.* 

The dwarves wanted to know why he had ever been 
brought at all, why he could not stick to his friends and 
come along with them, and why the wizard had not 
chosen someone with more sense. ‘He has been more 
trouble than use so far,’ said one. ‘If we have got to go 
back now into those abominable tunnels to look for him, 
then drat him, I say,’ 

Gandalf answered angrily: ‘I brought him, and I don’t 
bring things that are of no use. Either you help me to 
look for him, or I go and leave you here to get out of the 
mess as best you can yourselves. If we can only find him 
again, you will thank me before all is over. Whatever did 
you want to go and drop him for, Dori?’ 

‘You would have dropped him,’ said Dori, ‘if a goblin 
had suddenly grabbed your legs from behind in the dark, 
tripped up your feet, and kicked you in the back 1 * 

‘Then why didn’t you pick him up again?’ 

‘Good heavens! Can you ask! Goblins fighting and 
biting in the dark, everybody falling over bodies and hit¬ 
ting one another! You nearly chopped off my head with 

85 



THE HOBBIT 


Glamdring, and Thorin was stabbing here there and 
everywhere with Orcrist. All of a sudden you gave one of 
your blinding flashes, and we saw the goblins running 
back yelping. You shouted “follow me everybody!** and 
everybody ought to have followed. We thought every¬ 
body had. There was no time to count, as you know quite 
well, till we had dashed through the gate-guards, out of 
the lower door, and helter-skelter down here. And here 
we are - without the burglar, confusticate him 1 * 

‘And here*s the burglar!* said Bilbo stepping down 
into the middle of them, and slipping off the ring. 

Bless me, how they jumped! Then they shouted with 
surprise and delight. Gandalf was as astonished as any of 
them, but probably more pleased than all the others. He 
called to Balin and told him what he thought of a look¬ 
out man who let people walk right into them like that 
without warning. It is a fact that Bilbo*s reputation went 
up a very great deal with the dwarves after this. If they 
had still doubted that he was really a first-class burglar, 
in spite of Gandalf*s words, they doubted no longer. Balin 
was the most puzzled of all; but everyone said it was a 
very clever bit of work. 

Indeed Bilbo was so pleased with their praise that he 
just chuckled inside and said nothing whatever about the 
ring; and when they asked him how he did it, he said: 
‘O, just crept along, you know - very carefully and 
quietly.* 

‘Well, it is the first time that even a mouse has crept 
along carefully and quietly under my very nose and not 
been spotted,* said Balin, ‘and I take off my hood to you.* 
Which he did. 

‘Balin at your service,* said he. 

‘Your servant, Mr. Baggins,* said Bilbo. 

Then they wanted to know all about his adventures 
after they had lost him, and he sat down and told them 
everything - except about the finding of the ring (‘not 
just now* he thought). They were particularly interested 

86 



OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN INTO THE FIRE 

in the riddle-competition, and shuddered most appre¬ 
ciatively at his description of Gollum. 

‘And then I couldn’t think of any other question with 
him sitting beside me,* ended Bilbo; ‘so I said “what’s in 
my pocket?’’ And he couldn’t gurss in three goes. So I 
said: “what about your promise? Show me the way out! *’ 
But he came at me to kill me, ancl I ran, and fell over, 
and he missed me in the dark. Then I followed him, be¬ 
cause I heard him talking to himself. He thought I really 
knew the way out, and so he was making for it. And then 
he sat down in the entrance, and I could not get by. So I 
jumped over him and escaped, and ran down to the gate.’ 

‘What about the guards?* they asked. ‘Weren’t there 
any?’ 

‘O yes! Lots of them; but I dodged ’em. I got stuck in 
the door, which was only open a crack, and I lost lots of 
buttons,’ he said sadly looking at his torn clothes. ‘But I 
squeezed through all right - and here I am.’ 

The dwarves looked at him with quite a new respect, 
when he talked about dodging guards, jumping over 
Gollum, and squeezing through, as if it was not very dififi- 
cult or very alarming. 

‘What did I tell you?’ said Gandalf laughing. ‘Mr. 
Baggins has more about him than you guess.’ He gave 
Bilbo a queer look from under his bushy eyebrows, as he 
said this, and the hobbit wondered if he guessed at the 
part of his tale that he had left out. 

Then he had questions of his own to ask, for if Gandalf 
had explained it all by now to the. dwarves. Bilbo had not 
heard it. He wanted to know how the wizard had turned 
up again, and where they had all got to now. 

The wizard, to tell the truth, never minded explaining 
his cleverness more than once, so now he told Bilbo that 
both he and Elrond had been well aware of the presence 
of evil goblins in that part of the mountains. But their 
uiain gate used to come out on a different pass, one more 
easy to travel by, so that they often caught people be- 

87 



THE HOBBIT 


nighted near their gates. Evidently people had given up 
going that way, and the goblins must have opened their 
new entrance at the top of the pass the dwarves had taken, 
quite recently, because it had been found quite safe up to 
now. 

1 must see if I can’t find a more or less decent giant to 
block it up again,’ said Gandalf, ‘or soon there will be no 
getting over the mountains at all.’ 

As soon as Gandalf had heard Bilbo’s yell he realized 
what had happened. In the flash which killed the goblins 
that were grabbing him he had nipped inside the crack, 
just as it snapped to. He followed after the drivers and 
prisoners right to the edge of the great hall, and there he 
sat down and worked up the best magic he could in the 
shadows. 

‘A very ticklish business, it was,* he said. ‘Touch and 
gol' 

But of course, Gandalf had made a special study of 
bewitchments with fire and lights (even the hobbit had 
never forgotten the magic fireworks at Old Took’s mid¬ 
summer-eve parties, as you remember). The rest we all 
know - except that Gandalf knew all about the back¬ 
door, as the goblins called the lower gate, where Bilbo 
lost his buttons. As a matter of fact it was well known to 
anybody who was acquainted with this part of the moun¬ 
tains; but it took a wizard to keep his head in the tunnels 
and guide them in the right direction. 

‘They made that gate ages ago,* he said, ‘partly for a 
way of escape, if they needed one; partly as a way out 
into the lands beyond, where they still come in the dark 
and do great damage. They guard it always and no one 
has ever managed to block it up. They will guard it 
doubly after this,* he laughed. 

All the others laughed too. After all they had lost a 
good deal, but they had killed the Great Goblin and a 
great many others besides, and they had all escaped, so 
they might be said to have had the best of it so far. 

88 



OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN INTO THE FIRE 

But the wizard called them to th( ir senses. 'We must be 
getting on at once, now we are a little rested,’ he said. 
‘They will be out after us in hundieds when night comes 
on; and already shadows are lengtfiening. They can smell 
our footsteps for hours and hours after we have passed. 
We must be miles on before dusk. There will be a bit of 
moon, if it keeps fine, and that i> lucky. Not that they 
mind the moon much, but it will >;ive us a little light to 
steer by.* 

‘O yes!* he said in answer to more questions from the 
hobbit. ‘You lose track of time inside goblin-tunnels. 
Today’s Thursday, and it was Monday night or Tuesday 
morning that we were captured. We have gone miles and 
miles, and come right down through the heart of the 
mountains, and are now on the other side -- quite a short 
cut. But we are not at the point to which our pass would 
have brought us; we are too far to the North, and have 
some awkward country ahead. And we are still pretty 
high up. Let’s go on 1 ’ 

‘I’m so dreadfully hungry,* groaned Bilbo, who was 
suddenly aware that he had not had a meal since the 
night before the night before last. Just think of that for a 
hobbit 1 His stomach felt all empty and loose and his legs 
all wobbly, now that the excitement was over. 

‘Can’t help it,’ said Gandalf, ‘unless you like to go back 
and ask the goblins nicely to let you have your pony back 
and your luggage.’ 

‘No thank you 1 ’ said Bilbo. 

‘Very well then, we must just tighten our belts and 
trudge on - or we shall be made into supper, and that 
will be much worse than having none ourselves.’ 

As they went on Bilbo looked from side to side for 
something to eat; but the blackberries were still only in 
flower, and of course there were no nuts, nor even haw- 
thorn-berries. He nibbled a bit of sorrel, and he drank 
from a small mountain-stream that crossed the path, and 

89 



THE HOBBIT 


he ate three wild strawberries that he found on its bank, 
but it was not much good. 

They still went on and on. The rough path dis¬ 
appeared. The bushes, and the long grasses between the 
boulders, the patches of rabbit-cropped turf, the thyme 
and the sage and the marjoram, and the yellow rockroses 
all vanished, and they found themselves at the top of a 
wide steep slope of fallen stones, the remains of a land¬ 
slide. When they began to go down this, rubbish and 
small pebbles rolled away from their feet; soon larger bits 
of split stone went clattering down and started other 
pieces below them slithering and rolling; then lumps of 
rock were disturbed and bounded off, crashing down 
with a dust and a noise. Before long the whole slope 
above them and below them seemed on the move, and 
they were sliding away, huddled all together, in a fearful 
confusion of slipping, rattling, cracking slabs and stones. 

It was the trees at the bottom that saved them. They 
slid into the edge of a climbing wood of pines that here 
stood right up the mountain slope from the deeper 
darker forests of the valleys below. Some caught hold of 
the trunks and swung themselves into lower branches, 
some (like the little hobbit) got behind a tree to shelter 
from the onslaught of the rocks. Soon the danger was 
over, the slide had stopped, and the last faint crashes 
could be heard as the largest of the disturbed stones went 
bounding and spinning among the bracken and the pine- 
roots far below. 

*WellI That has got us on a bit,* said Gandalf; ‘and 
even goblins tracking us will have a job to come down 
here quietly.* 

*I daresay,* grumbled Bombur; ‘but they won*t find it 
difficult to send stones bouncing down on our heads/ The 
dwarves (and Bilbo) were feeling far from happy, and 
were rubbing their bruised and damaged legs and feet. 

‘Nonsense I We are going to turn aside here out of the 
path of the slide. We must be quick! Look at the light! ’ 

90 



OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN INTO THE FIRE 

The sun had long gone behind the mountains. Already 
the shadows were deepening ab(>ut them, though far 
away through the trees and over the black tops of those 
growing lower down they could still see the evening 
lights on the plains beyond. The> limped along now as 
fast as they were able down the gentle slopes of a pine 
forest in a slanting path leading steadily southwards. At 
times they were pushing through a sea of bracken with 
tall fronds rising right above the hobbit’s head; at times 
they were marching along quiet as quiet over a floor of 
pine needles; and all the while the forest-gloom got 
heavier and the forest-silence deeper. There was no wind 
that evening to bring even a sea-sighing into the branches 
of the trees. 

‘Must we go any further?’ asked Bilbo, when it was so 
dark that he could only just see Thorin’s beard wagging 
beside him, and so quiet that he could hear the dwarves’ 
breathing like a loud noise. ‘My toes are all bruised and 
bent, and my legs ache, and my stomach is wagging like 
an empty sack.’ 

‘A bit further,* said Gandalf. 

After what seemed ages further they came suddenly to 
an opening where no trees grew. The moon was up and 
was shining into the clearing. Somehow it struck all of 
them as not at all a nice place, although there was noth¬ 
ing wrong to see. 

All of a sudden they heard a howl away down hill, a 
long shuddering howl. It was answered by another away 
to the right and a good deal nearer to them; then by 
another not far away to the left. It was wolves howling at 
the moon, wolves gathering together I 

There were no wolves living near Mr. Baggins’ hole at 
borne, but he knew that noise. He had had it described to 
bim often enough in tales. One of his elder cousins (on 
the Took side), who had been a great traveller, used to 
imitate it to frighten him. To hear it out in the forest 

91 



THE HOBBIT 


under the moon was too much for Bilbo. Even magic 
rings are not much use against wolves - especially against 
the evil packs that lived under the shadow of the goblin- 
infested mountains, over the Edge of the Wild on the 
borders of the unknown. Wolves of that sort smell keener 
than goblins, and do not need to see you to catch 
you I 

‘What shall we do, what shall we do T he cried. ‘Escap¬ 
ing goblins to be caught by wolves!* he said, and it be¬ 
came a proverb, though we now say ‘out of the frying-pan 
into the fire* in the same sort of uncomfortable situations. 

‘Up the trees quick!’ cried Gandalf; and they ran to 
the trees at the edge of the glade, hunting for those that 
had branches fairly low, or were slender enough to swarm 
up. They found them as quick as ever they could, you can 
guess; and up they went as high as ever they could trust 
the branches. You would have laughed (from a safe dis¬ 
tance), if you had seen the dwarves sitting up in the trees 
with their beards dangling down, like old gentlemen 
gone cracked and playing at being boys. Fili and Kili 
were at the top of a tall larch like an enormous Christmas 
tree. Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, and Gloin were more comfort¬ 
able in a huge pine with regular branches sticking out at 
intervals like the spokes of a wheel. Bifur, Bofur, 
Bombur, and Thorin were in another. Dwalin and Balin 
had swarmed up a tall slender fir with few branches and 
were trying to find a place to sit in the greenery of the 
topmost boughs. Gandalf, who was a good deal taller 
than the others, had found a tree into which they could 
not climb, a large pine standing at the very edge of the 
glade. He was quite hidden in its boughs, but you could 
see his eyes gleaming in the moon as he peeped out. 

And Bilbo? He could not get into any tree, and was 
scuttling about from trunk to trunk, like a rabbit that 
has lost its hole and has a dog after it 

‘You*ve left the burglar behind again!’ said Nori to 
Dori looking down. 


9 « 



OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN INTO THE FIRE 

1 can’t be always carrying burglars on my back/ said 
Dori, ‘down tunnels and up trees I What do you think I 
am? A porter?’ 

‘He’ll be eaten if we don’t do something,’ said Thorin, 
for there were howls all round them now, getting nearer 
and nearer. ‘Dori I ’ he called, for Dori was lowest down in 
the easiest tree, ‘be quick, and gi\e Mr. Baggins a hand 
up!’ 

Dori was really a decent fellow in spite of his grumb¬ 
ling. Poor Bilbo could not reach his hand even when he 
climbed down to the bottom branch and hung his arm 
down as far as ever he could. So Dori actually climbed 
out of the tree and let Bilbo scramble up and stand on 
his back. 

Just at that moment the wolves trotted howling into 
the clearing. All of a sudden there were hundreds of eyes 
looking at them. Still Dori did not let Bilbo down. He 
waited till he had clambered off his shoulders into the 
branches, and then he jumped for the branches himself. 
Only just in time! A wolf snapped at his cloak as he 
swung up, and nearly got him. In a minute there was a 
whole pack of them yelping all round the tree and leap¬ 
ing up at the trunk, with eyes blazing and tongues hang¬ 
ing out. 

But even the wild Wargs (for so the evil wolves over 
the Edge of the Wild were named) cannot climb trees. 
For a time they were safe. Luckily it was warm and not 
windy. Trees are not very comfortable to sit in for long at 
any time; but in the cold and the wind, with wolves all 
round below waiting for you, they can be perfectly miser¬ 
able places. 

This glade in the ring of trees was evidently a meeting- 
place of the wolves. More and more kept coming in. They 
left guards at the foot of the tree in which Dori and Bilbo 
were, and then went snuffling about till they had smelt 
out every tree that had anyone in it. These they guarded 
too, while all the rest (hundreds and hundreds it seemed) 

9S 



THE HOBBIT 


went and sat in a great circle in the glade; and in the 
middle of the circle was a great grey wolf. He spoke to 
them in the dreadful language of the Wargs. Gandalf 
understood it. Bilbo did not, but it sounded terrible to 
him, and as if all their talk was about cruel and wicked 
things, as it was. Every now and then all the Wargs in the 
circle would answer their grey chief all together, and 
their dreadful clamour almost made the hobbit fall out 
of his pine-tree. 

I will tell you what Gandalf heard, though Bilbo did 
not understand it. The Wargs and the goblins often 
helped one another in wicked deeds. Goblins do not 
usually venture very far from their mountains, unless 
they are driven out and are looking for new homes, or are 
marching to war (which I am glad to say has not hap¬ 
pened for a long while). But in those days they sometimes 
used to go on raids, especially to get food or slaves to 
work for them. Then they often got the Wargs to help 
and shared the plunder with them. Sometimes they rode 
on wolves like men do on horses. Now it seemed that a 
great goblin-raid had been planned for that very night. 
The Wargs had come to meet the goblins and the goblins 
were late. The reason, no doubt, was the death of the 
Great Goblin, and all the excitement caused by the 
dwarves and Bilbo and the wizard, for whom they were 
probably still hunting. 

In spite of the dangers of this far land bold men had of 
late been making their way back into it from the South, 
cutting down trees, and building themselves places to live 
in among the more pleasant woods in the valleys and 
along the river-shores. There were many of them, and 
they were brave and well-armed, and even the Wargs 
dared not attack them if there were many together, or in 
the bright day. But now they had planned with the 
goblins’ help to come by night upon some of the villages 
nearest the mountains. If their plan had been carried out, 
there would have been none left there next day; all would 

94 



OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN INTO THE FIRE 

have been killed except the few the goblins kept from the 
wolves and carried back as prisone rs to their caves. 

This was dreadful talk to listen lo, not only because of 
the brave woodmen and their wives and children, but 
also because of the danger which now threatened Gan- 
dalf and his friends. The Wargs v\ ere angry and puzzled 
at finding them here in their verv' meeting-place. They 
thought they were friends of the woodmen, and were 
come to spy on them, and would ttike news of their plans 
down into the valleys, and then the goblins and the 
wolves would have to fight a terrible battle instead of 
capturing prisoners and devouring people waked sud¬ 
denly from their sleep. So the Wargs had no intention of 
going away and letting the people up the trees escape, at 
any rate not until morning. And long before that, they 
said, goblin soldiers would be coming down from the 
mountains; and goblins can climb trees, or cut them 
down. 

Now you can understand why Gandalf, listening to 
their growling and yelping, began to be dreadfully 
afraid, wizard though he was, and to feel that they were 
in a very bad place, and had not yet escaped at all. All 
the same he was not going to let them have it all their 
own way, though he could not do very much stuck up in 
a tall tree with wolves all round on the ground below. He 
gathered the huge pine-cones from the branches of his 
tree. Then he set one alight with bright blue fire, and 
threw it whizzing down among the circle of the wolves. It 
struck one on the back, and immediately his shaggy coat 
caught fire, and he was leaping to and fro yelping 
horribly. Then another came and another, one in blue 
flames, one in red, another in green. They burst on the 
ground in the middle of the circle and went off in col¬ 
oured sparks and smoke. A specially large one hit the 
chief wolf on the nose, and he leaped in the air ten feet, 
and then rushed round and round the circle biting and 
snapping even at the other wolves in his anger and fright. 

95 



THE HOBBIT 


The dwarves and Bilbo shouted and cheered. The rage 
of the wolves was terrible to see, and the commotion they 
made filled all the forest. Wolves are afraid of fire at all 
times, but this was a most horrible and uncanny fire. If a 
spark got in their coats it stuck and burned into them, 
and unless they rolled over quick they were soon all in 
flames. Very soon all about the glade wolves were rolling 
over and over to put out the sparks on their backs, while 
those that were burning were running about howling 
and setting others alight, till their own friends chased 
them away and they fled off down the slopes crying and 
yammering and looking for water. 

‘What is all this uproar in the forest tonight?* said the 
Lord of the Eagles. He was sitting, black in the moon¬ 
light, on top of a lonely pinnacle of rock at the eastern 
edge of the mountains. 1 hear wolves* voices! Are the 
goblins at mischief in the woods?* 

He swept up into the air, and immediately two of his 
guards from the rocks at either side leaped up to follow 
him. They circled up in the sky and looked down upon 
the ring of the Wargs, a tiny spot far far below. But 
eagles have keen eyes and can see small things at a great 
distance. The lord of the eagles of the Misty Mountains 
had eyes that could look at the sun unblinking, and 
could see a rabbit moving on the ground a mile below 
even in the moonlight. So though he could not see the 
people in the trees, he could make out the commotion 
among the wolves and see the tiny flashes of fire, and hear 
the howling and yelping come up faint from far beneath 
him. Also he could see the glint of the moon on goblin 
spears and helmets, as long lines of the wicked folk crept 
down the hillsides from their gate and wound into the 
wood. 

Eagles are not kindly birds. Some are cowardly and 
cruel. But the ancient race of the northern mountains 
were the greatest of all birds; they were proud and strong 

96 



OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN INTO THE FIRE 

and noble-hearted. They did nor love goblins, or fear 
them. When they took any notice of them at all (which 
was seldom, for they did not ear such creatures), they 
swooped on them and drove them shrieking back to their 
caves, and stopped whatever wickedness they were doing. 
The goblins hated the eagles and feared them, but could 
not reach their lofty seats, or driv< them from the moun¬ 
tains. 

Tonight the Lord of the Eagles was filled with curiosity 
to know what was afoot; so he summoned many other 
eagles to him, and they flew awav from the mountains, 
and slowly circling ever round and round they came 
down, down, down towards the ring of the wolves and the 
meeting-place of the goblins. 

A very good thing too! Dreadful things had been 
going on down there. The wolves that had caught fire 
and fled into the forest had set it alight in several places. 
It was high summer, and on this eastern side of the 
mountains there had been little rain for some time. 
Yellowing bracken, fallen branches, deep-piled pine- 
needles, and here and there dead trees, were soon in 
flames. All round the clearing of the Wargs fire was leap¬ 
ing. But the wolf-guards did not leave the trees. Mad¬ 
dened and angry they were leaping and howling round 
the trunks, and cursing the dwarves in their horrible 
language, with their tongues hanging out, and their eyes 
shining as red and fierce as the flames. 

Then suddenly goblins came running up yelling. They 
thought a battle with the woodmen was going on; but 
they soon learned what had really happened. Some of 
them actually sat down and laughed. Others waved their 
spears and clashed the shafts against their shields. Gob¬ 
lins are not afraid of fire, and they soon had a plan which 
seemed to them most amusing. 

Some got all the wolves together in a pack. Some 
stacked fern and brushwood round the tree-trunks. 
Others rushed round and stamped and beat, and beat 

97 



THE HOBBIT 


and stamped, until nearly all the flames were put out - 
but they did not put out the fire nearest to the trees 
where the dwarves were. That fire they fed with leaves and 
dead branches and bracken. Soon they had a ring of 
smoke and flame all round the dwarves, a ring which they 
kept from spreading outwards; but it closed slowly in, till 
the running fire was licking the fuel piled under the 
trees. Smoke was in Bilbo’s eyes, he could feel the heat of 
the flames; and through the reek he could see the goblins 
dancing round and round in a circle like people round a 
midsummer bonfire. Outside the ring of dancing warriors 
with spears and axes stood the wolves at a respectful dis¬ 
tance, watching and waiting. 

He could hear the goblins beginning a horrible song: 

Fifteen birds in five firtrees, 

their feathers were fanned in a fiery breeze! 

But, funny little birds, they had no wings! 

O what shall we do with the funny little things! 
Roast *em alive, or stew them in a pot; 
fry them, boil them and eat them hot! 

Then they stopped and shouted out: ‘Fly away little 
birds! Fly away if you can! Come down little birds, or 
you will get roasted in your nests! Sing, sing little birds! 
Why don’t you sing?’ 

‘Go away! little boys!’ shouted Gandalf in answer. ‘It 
isn’t bird-nesting time. Also naughty little boys that play 
with fire get punished.’ He said it to make them angry, 
and to show them he was not frightened of them - 
though of course he was, wizard though he was. But they 
took no notice, and they went on singing. 

Burn, burn tree and fern! 

Shrivel and scorch! A fizzling torch 

To light the night for our delight, 

Ya hey! 


98 



OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN INTO THE FIRE 

Bake and toast *em, fry and roast *em! 
till beards blaze, and eyes glaze; 
till hair smells and skin ? crack, 
fat melts, and bones blcck 
in cinders lie 
beneath the sky! 

So dwarves shall die, 
and light the night for our delight, 

Ya hey! 

Ya-harri-hey! 

Ya hoy! 

And with that Ya hoy! the flames were under Gan- 
dalf’s tree. In a moment it spread to the others. The bark 
caught fire, the lower branches cracked. 

Then Gandalf climbed to the top of his tree. The 
sudden splendour flashed from his wand like lightning, 
as he got ready to spring down from on high right among 
the spears of the goblins. That would have been the end 
of him, though he would probably have killed many of 
them as he came hurtling down like a thunderbolt. But 
he never leaped. 

Just at that moment the Lord of the Eagles swept down 
from above, seized him in his talons, and was gone. 

There was a howl of anger and surprise from the gob¬ 
lins. Loud cried the Lord of the Eagles, to whom Gandalf 
had now spoken. Back swept the great birds that were 
with him, and down they came like huge black shadows. 
The wolves yammered and gnashed their teeth; the gob¬ 
lins yelled and stamped with rage, and flung their heavy 
spears in the air in vain. Over them swooped the eagles; 
the dark rush of their beating wings smote them to the 
floor or drove them far away; their talons tore at goblin 
faces. Other birds flew to the tree-tops and seized the 
dwarves, who were scrambling up now as far as ever they 
dared go. 


99 



THE HOBBIT 


Poor little Bilbo was very nearly left behind again I He 
just managed to catch hold of Dorics legs, as Dori was 
borne off last of all; and up they went together above the 
tumult and the burning. Bilbo swinging in the air with 
his arms nearly breaking. 

Now, far below, the goblins and the wolves were scatter¬ 
ing far and wide in the woods. A few eagles were still 
circling and sweeping above the battle-ground. The 
flames about the trees sprang suddenly up above the 
highest branches. They went up in crackling fire. There 
was a sudden flurry of sparks and smoke. Bilbo had 
escaped only just in time! 

Soon the light of the burning was faint below, a red 
twinkle on the black floor; and they were high up in the 
sky, rising all the time in strong sweeping circles. Bilbo 
never forgot that flight, clinging on to Dori*s ankles. He 
moaned ‘my arms, my arms! but Dori groaned ‘my poor 
legs, my poor legs! ‘ 

At the best of times heights made Bilbo giddy. He used 
to turn queer if he looked over the edge of quite a little 
cliff; and he had never like ladders, let alone trees (never 
having had to escape from wolves before). So you can 
imagine how his head swam now, when he looked down 
between his dangling toes and saw the dark lands open¬ 
ing wide underneath him, touched here and there with 
the light of the moon on a hill-side rock or a stream in 
the plains. 

The pale peaks of the mountains were coming nearer, 
moonlit spikes of rock sticking out of black shadows. 
Summer or not, it seemed very cold. He shut his eyes and 
wondered if he could hold on any longer. Then he 
imagined what would happen if he did not. He felt 
sick. 

The flight ended only just in time for him, just before 
his arms gave way. He loosed Dori’s ankles with a gasp 
and fell on to the rough platform of an eagle’s eyrie. 
There he lay without speaking, and his thoughts were a 

100 



OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN INTO THE FIRE 

mijcture of surprise at being saved from the fire, and fear 
lest he fell off that narrow place into the deep shadows on 
either side. He was feeling very queer indeed in his head 
by this time after the dreadful adventures of the last 
three days with next to nothing to eat, and he found 
himself saying aloud: ‘Now I kn(» w what a piece of bacon. 
feels like when it is suddenly picked out of the pan on a 
fork and put back on the shelf! 

‘No you don’t! ’ he heard Dori answering, ‘because the 
bacon knows that it will get back in the pan sooner or 
later; and it is to be hoped we shan’t. Also eagles aren’t 
forks! ’ 

‘O no! Not a bit like storks - forks, I mean,’ said Bilbo 
sitting up and looking anxiously at the eagle who was 
perched close by. He wondered what other nonsense he 
had been saying, and if the eagle would think it rude. 
You ought not to be rude to an eagle, when you are only 
the size of a hobbit, and are up in his eyrie at night! 

The eagle only sharpened his beak on a stone and 
trimmed his feathers and took no notice. 

Soon another eagle flew up. ‘The Lord of the Eagles 
bids you to bring your prisoners to the Great Shelf,’ he 
cried and was off again. The other seized Dori in his 
claws and flew away with him into the night leaving 
Bilbo all alone. He had just strength to wonder what the 
messenger had meant by “prisoners”, and to begin to 
think of being torn up for supper like a rabbit, when his 
own turn came. 

The eagle came back, seized him in his talons by the 
back of his coat, and swooped off. This time he flew only 
a short way. Very soon Bilbo was laid down, trembling 
with fear, on a wide shelf of rock on the mountain-side. 
There was no path down on to it save by flying; and no 
path down off it except by jumping over a precipice. 
There he found all the others sitting with their backs to 
the mountain wall. The Lord of the Eagles also was there 
and was speaking to Gandalf. 

101 



THE HOBBIT 


It seemed that Bilbo was not going to be eaten after 
all. The wizard and the eagle-lord appeared to know cJne 
another slightly, and even to be on friendly terms. As a 
matter of fact Gandalf, who had often been in the moun¬ 
tains, had once rendered a service to the eagles and 
healed their lord from an arrow-wound. So you see 
‘prisoners' had meant ‘prisoners rescued from the gob¬ 
lins’ only, and not captives of the eagles. As Bilbo list¬ 
ened to the talk of Gandalf he realized that at last they 
were going to escape really and truly from the dreadful 
mountains. He was discussing plans with the Great Eagle 
for carrying the dwarves and himself and Bilbo far away 
and setting them down well on their journey across the 
plains below. 

The Lord of the Eagles would not take them anywhere 
near where men lived. ‘They would shoot at us with their 
great bows of yew* he said, ‘for they would think we were 
after their sheep. And at other times they would be right. 
Nol we are glad to cheat the goblins of their sport, and 
glad to repay our thanks to you, but we will not risk 
ourselves for dwarves in the southward plains.’ 

‘Very well,’ said Gandalf. ‘Take us where and as far as 
you willl We are already deeply obliged to you. But in 
the meantime we are famished with hunger.’ 

‘I am nearly dead of it,* said Bilbo in a weak little voice 
that nobody heard. 

‘That can perhaps be mended,’ said the Lord of the 
Eagles. 

Later on you might have seen a bright fire on the shelf 
of rock and the figures of the dwarves round it cooking 
and making a fine roasting smell. The eagles had brought 
up dry boughs for fuel, and they had brought rabbit, 
hares, and a small sheep. The dwarves managed all the 
preparations. Bilbo was too weak to help, and anyway he 
was not much good at skinning rabbits or cutting up 
meat, being used to having it delivered by the butcher all 
ready to cook. Gandalf, too, was lying down after doing 



QUEER LODGINGS 

his part in setting the fire going, ssnce Oin and Gloin had 
lost their tinder-boxes. (Dwarve> have never taken to 
matches even yet.) 

So ended the adventures of the Misty Mountains. Soon 
Bilbo’s stomach was feeling full ind comfortable again, 
and he felt he could sleep contertedly, though really he. 
would have liked a loaf and bufter better than bits of 
meat toasted on sticks. He slept curled up on the hard 
rock more soundly than ever he had done on his feather¬ 
bed in his own little hole at home. But all night he 
dreamed of his own house and wandered in his sleep into 
all his different rooms looking for something that he 
could not find nor remember what it looked like. 


7 Queer lodgings 

The next morning Bilbo woke up with the early sun in 
his eyes. He jumped up to look at the time and to go and 
put his kettle on - and found he was not home at all. So 
he sat down and wished in vain for a wash and a brush. 
He did not get either, nor tea nor toast nor bacon for his 
breakfast, only cold mutton and rabbit. And after that he 
had to get ready for a fresh start. 

This time he was allowed to climb on to an eagle’s 
back and ding between his wings. The air rushed over 
him and he shut his eyes. The dwarves were crying fare¬ 
wells and promising to repay the lord of the eagles if ever 
they could, as off rose fifteen great birds from the moun¬ 
tain’s side. The sun was still close to the eastern edge of 
things. The morning was cool, and mists were in the 
valleys and hollows and twined here and there about the 
peaks and pinnacles of the hills. Bilbo opened an eye to 
peep and saw that the birds were already high up and the 

. los 



THE HOBBIT 


world was far away, and the mountains were falling back 
behind them into the distance. He shut his eyes again 
and held on tighter. 

‘Don’t pinch 1’ said his eagle. ‘You need not be fright¬ 
ened like a rabbit, even if you look rather like one. 
It is a fair morning with little wind. What is finer than 
flying?’ 

Bilbo would have liked to say: ‘A warm bath and late 
breakfast on the lawn afterwards;’ but he thought it 
better to say nothing at all, and to let go his clutch just a 
tiny bit. 

After a good while the eagles must have seen the point 
they were making for, even from their great height, for 
they began to go down circling round in great spirals. 
They did this for a long while, and at last the hobbit 
opened his eyes again. The earth was much nearer, and 
below them were trees that looked like oaks and elms, 
and wide grass lands, and a river running through it all. 
But cropping out of the ground, right in the path of the 
stream which looped itself about it, was a great rock, 
almost a hill of stone, like a last outpost of the distant 
mountains, or a huge piece cast miles into the plain by 
some giant among giants. 

Quickly now to the top of this rock the eagles swooped 
one by one and set down their passengers. 

‘Farewell! * they cried, ‘wherever you fare, till your 
eyries receive you at the journey’s end 1 ’ That is the 
polite thing to say among eagles. 

‘May the wind under your wings bear you where the 
sun sails and the moon walks,’ answered Gandalf, who 
knew the correct reply. 

And so they parted. And though the lord of the eagles 
became in after days the King of All Birds and wore a 
golden crown, and his fifteen chieftains golden collars 
(made of the gold that the dwarves gave them), Bilbo 
never saw them again ~ except high and far off in the 

104 



• QUEER LODGIVGS 

battle of Five Armies. But as that comes in at the end of 
this tale we will say no more about it just now. 

There was a flat space on the top of the hill of stone 
and a well worn path with many 'teps leading down it to 
the river, across which a ford of h uge flat stones led to the 
grass-land beyond the stream. There was a little cave (a 
wholesome one with a pebbly floor) at the foot of the 
steps and near the end of the stony ford. Here the party 
gathered and discussed what was to be done. 

1 always meant to see you all safe (if possible) over the 
mountains,’ said the wizard, ‘and now by good manage¬ 
ment and good luck I have done it. Indeed we are now a 
good deal further east than I ever meant to come with 
you, for after all this is not my adventure. I may look in 
on it again before it is all over, but in the meanwhile I 
have some other pressing business to attend to.’ 

The dwarves groaned and looked most distressed, and 
Bilbo wept. They had begun to think Gandalf was going 
to come all the way and would always be there to help 
them out of difficulties. ‘I am not going to disappear this 
very instant,* said he. ‘I can give you a day or two mqre. 
Probably I can help you out of your present plight, and I 
need a littl'e help myself. We have no food, and no bag¬ 
gage, and no ponies to ride; and you don’t know where 
you are. Now I can tell you that. You are still some miles 
north of the path which we should have been following, 
if we had not left the mountain pass in a hurry. Very few 
people live in these parts, unless they have come here 
since I was last down this way, which is some years ago. 
But there is somebody that I know of, who lives not far 
away. That Somebody made the steps on the great rock - 
the Carrock I believe he calls it. He does not come here 
often, certainly not in the daytime, and it is no good 
waiting for him. In fact it would be very dangerous. We 
must go and find him; and if all goes well at our meeting, 
I think I shall be off and wish you like the eagles “fare¬ 
well wherever you fare I **' 

105 



THE HOBBIT 


They begged him not to leave them. They offered him 
dragon-gold and silver and jewels, but he would not 
change his mind. ‘We shall see, we shall seel* he said, 
‘and I think I have earned already some of your dragon- 
gold - when you have got it.* 

After that they stopped pleading. Then they took off 
their clothes and bathed in the river, which was shallow 
and clear and stony at the ford. When they had dried in 
the sun, vihich was now strong and warm, they were re¬ 
freshed, if still sore and a little hungry. Soon they crossed 
the ford (carrying the hobbit), and then began to march 
through the long green grass and down the lines of the 
wide-armed oaks and the tall elms. 

‘And why is it called the Carrock?* asked Bilbo as he 
went along at the wizard’s side. 

‘He called it the Carrock, because carrock is his word 
for it. He calls things like that carrocks, and this one is 
the Carrock because it is the only one near his home and 
he knows it well.’ 

‘Who calls it? Who knows it?’ 

‘The Somebody I spoke of - a very great person. You 
must all be very polite when I introduce you. I shall 
introduce you slowly, two by two, I think; and you must 
be careful not to annoy him, or heaven knows what will 
happen. He can be appalling when he is angry, though 
he is kind enough if humoured. Still I warn you he gets 
angry easily.' 

The dwarves all gathered round when they heard the 
wizard talking like this to Bilbo. ‘Is that the person you 
are taking us to now?' they asked. ‘Couldn't you find 
someone more easy-tempered? Hadn't you better explain 
it all a bit clearer?' - and so on. 

‘Yes it certainly is! No I could not! And I was explain¬ 
ing very carefully,' answered the wizard crossly. ‘If you 
must know more, his name is Beorn. He is very strong, 
and he is a skin-changer.' 

106 



QUEER LODGINGS 

‘What! a furrier, a man thai calls rabbits conies, 
when he doesn’t turn their skins into squirrels?’ asked 
Bilbo. 

’Good gracious heavens, no, no, no, NO! ’ said Gandalf. 
’Don’t be a fool Mr. Baggins if you can help it; and in the 
name of all wonder don’t mention the word furrier again 
as long as you are within a hundred miles of his house, 
nor rug, cape, tippet, muff, nor any other such unfortun¬ 
ate word! He is a skin-changer. He changes his skin: 
sometimes he is a huge black bear, sometimes he is a great 
strong black-haired man with huge arms and a great 
beard. I cannot tell you much more, though that ought to 
be enough. Some say that he is a bear descended from the 
great and ancient bears of the mountains that lived there 
before the giants came. Others say that he is a man de¬ 
scended from the first men who lived before Smaug or the 
other dragons came into this part of the world, and 
before the goblins came into the hills out of the North. I 
cannot say, though I fancy the last is the true tale. He is 
not the sort of person to ask questions of. 

’At any rate he is under no enchantment but his own. 
He lives in an oak-wood and has a great wooden house; 
and as a man he keeps cattle and horses which are nearly 
as marvellous as himself. They work for him and talk to 
him. He does not eat them; neither does he hunt or eat 
wild animals. He keeps hives and hives of great fierce 
bees, and lives most on cream and honey. As a bear he 
ranges far and wide. I once saw him sitting all alone on 
the top of the Carrock at night watching the moon sink¬ 
ing towards the Misty Mountains, and I heard him growl 
in the tongue of bears: ’’The day will come when they 
will perish and I shall go back I ” That is why I believe he 
once came from the mountains himself.’ 

Bilbo and the dwarves had now plenty to think about, 
and they asked no more questions. They still had a long 
way to walk before them. Up slope and down dale they 

107 



THE HOBBIT 


plodded. It grew very hot. Sometimes they rested under 
the trees, and then Bilbo felt so hungry that he would 
have eaten acorns, if any had been ripe enough yet to 
have fallen to the ground. 

It was the middle of the afternoon before they noticed 
that great patches of flowers had begun to spring up, all 
the same kinds growing together as if they had been 
planted. Especially there was clover, waving patches of 
cockscomb clover, and purple clover, and wide stretches 
of short white sweet honey-smelling clover. There was a 
buzzing and a whirring and a droning in the air. Bees 
were busy everywhere. And such bees! Bilbo had never 
seen anything like them. 

‘If one was to sting me,‘ he thought, ‘I should swell up 
as big again as I ami* 

They were bigger than hornets. The drones were 
bigger than your thumb, a good deal, and the bands of 
yellow on their deep black bodies shone like fiery gold. 

‘We are getting near,' said Gandalf. ‘We are on the 
edge of his bee-pastures.' 

After a while they came to a belt of tall and very 
ancient oaks, and beyond these to a high thom-hedge 
through which you could neither see nor scramble. 

‘You had better wait here,' said the wizard to the 
dwarves; ‘and when I call or whistle begin to come after 
me - you will see the way I go - but only in pairs, mind, 
about five minutes between each pair of you. Bombur is 
fattest and will do for two, he had better come alone and 
last. Come on Mr. BagginsI There is a gate somewhere 
round this way.' And with that he went off along the 
hedge taking the frightened hobbit with him. 

They soon came to a wooden gate, high and broad, 
beyond which they could see gardens and a cluster of low 
wooden buildings, some thatched and made of unshaped 
logs, barns, stables, sheds, and a long low wooden house. 
Inside on the southward side of the great hedge were 

108 



QUEER LODGINGS 

rows and rows of hives with bell-shaped tops made of 
straw. The noise of the giant bee^ flying to and fro and 
crawling in and out filled all the air. 

The wizard and the hobbit pushed open the heavy 
creaking gate and went down a wide track towards the 
house. Some horses, very sleek ami well-groomed, trotted 
up across the grass and looked it them intently with 
very intelligent faces; then off they galloped to the 
buildings. 

‘They have gone to tell him of the arrival of strangers,’ 
said Gandalf. 

Soon they reached a courtyard, three walls of which 
were formed by the wooden house and its two long wings. 
In the middle there was lying a great oak-trunk with 
many lopped branches beside it. Standing near was a 
huge man with a thick black beard and hair, and great 
bare arms and legs with knotted muscles. He was clothed 
in a tunic of wool down to his knees, and was leaning on 
a large axe. The horses were standing by him with their 
noses at his shoulder. 

'Ugh 1 here they are I ’ he said to the horses. ‘They don’t 
look dangerous. You can be off! ’ He laughed a great roll¬ 
ing laugh, put down his axe and came forward. 

'Who are you and what do you want?’ he asked gruffly, 
standing in front of them and towering tall above Gan¬ 
dalf. As for Bilbo he could easily have trotted through his 
legs without ducking his head to miss the fringe of the 
man’s brown tunic. 

'I am Gandalf,’ said the wizard. 

‘Never heard of him,’ growled the man, ‘And what’s 
this little fellow?’ he said, stooping down to frown at the 
hobbit with his bushy black eyebrows. 

‘That is Mr. Baggins, a hobbit of good family and un¬ 
impeachable reputation,’ said Gandalf. Bilbo bowed. He 
had no hat to take off, and was painfully conscious of his 
many missing buttons. ‘I am a wizard,’ continued Gan- 
flalf. ‘I have heard of you, if you have not heard of me; 

109 



THE HOBBIT 


but perhaps you have heard of my good cousin Radagast 
who lives near the Southern borders of Mirk wood?* 

‘Yes; not a bad fellow as wizards go, I believe. I used to 
see him now and again,’ said Beorn. ‘Well, now I know 
who you are, or who you say you are. What do you want?’ 

‘To tell you the truth, we have lost our luggage and 
nearly lost our way, and are rather in need of help, or at 
least of advice. I may say we have had rather a bad time 
with goblins in the mountains.’ 

‘Goblins?’ said the big man less gruffly. ‘O ho, so you’ve 
been having trouble with them have you? What did you 
go near them for?’ 

‘We did not mean to. They surprised us at night in a 
pass which we had to cross, we were coming out of the 
Lands over West into these countries - it is a long tale.’ 

‘Then you had better come inside and tell me some of 
it, if it won’t take all day,’ said the man, leading the way 
through a dark door that opened out of the courtyard 
into the house. 

Following him they found themselves in a wide hall 
with a fire-place in the middle. Though it was summer 
there was a wood-fire burning and the smoke was rising 
to the blackened rafters in search of the way out through 
an opening in the roof. They passed through this dim 
hall, lit only by the fire and the hole above it, and came 
through another smaller door into a sort of veranda 
propped on wooden posts made of single tree-trunks. It 
faced south and was still warm and filled with the light of 
the westering sun which slanted into it, and fell golden 
on the garden full of flowers that came right up to the 
steps. 

Here they sat on wooden benches while Gandalf began 
his tale, and Bilbo swung his dangling legs and looked at 
the flowers in the garden, wondering what their names 
could be, as he had never seen half of them before. 

‘I was coming over the mountains with a friend oi 
two.. .* said the wizard. 


110 



QUEER LODGINGS 

‘Or two? I can only see one, and a little one at that,' 
said Beorn. 

'Well to tell you the truth, I did not like to bother you 
with a lot of us, until I found out if you were busy. I will 
give a call, if I may.' 

‘Go on, call away I * 

So Gandalf gave a long shrill whistle, and presently 
Thorin and Dori came round ihr house by the garden 
path and stood bowing low beforr them. 

'One or three you meant, I see I ’ said Beorn. ‘But these 
aren't hobbits, they are dwarves!’ 

‘Thorin Oakenshield, at your service! Dori at your 
service!' said the two dwarves bowing again. 

‘I don't need your service, thank you,' said Beorn, ‘but 
I expect you need mine. I am not over fond of dwarves; 
but if it is true you are Thorin (son of Thrain, son of 
Thror, I believe), and that your companion is respect¬ 
able, and that you are enemies of goblins and are not up to 
any mischief in my lands - what are you up to, by the way?' 

‘They are on their way to visit tlie land of their fathers, 
away east beyond Mirk wood,' put in Gandalf, ‘and it is 
entirely an accident that we are in your lands at all. We 
were crossing by the High Pass that should have brought 
us to the road that lies to the south of your country, when 
we were attacked by the evil goblins - as I was about to 
tell you.' 

‘Go on telling, then I' said Beorn, who was never very 
polite. 

‘There was a terrible storm; the stone-giants were out 
hurling rocks, and at the head of the pass we took refuge 
in a cave, the hobbit and I and several of our com¬ 
panions_' 

‘Do you call two several?' 

‘Well, no. As a matter of fact there were more than 
two.' 

‘Where are they? Killed, eaten, gone home?' 

‘Well, no. They don't seem all to have come when I 

111 



THE HOBBIT 


whistled. Shy, I expect. You see, we are very much afraid 
that we are rather a lot for you to entertain.’ 

‘Go on, whistle again I I am in for a party, it seems, and 
one or two more won’t make much difference,’ growled 
Beorn. 

Gandalf whistled again; but Nori and Ori were there 
almost before he had stopped, for, if you remember, 
Gandalf had told them to come in pairs every five 
minutes. 

‘Hullo! ’ said Beorn. ‘You came pretty quick - where 
were you hiding? Come on, my jack-in-the-boxes!’ 

‘Nori at your service, Ori at...’ they began; but Beorn 
interrupted them. 

‘Thank you! When I want your help I will ask for it. 
Sit down, and let’s get on wuth this tale, or it will be 
supper-time before it is ended.’ 

‘As soon as we were asleep,’ went on Gandalf, *a crack 
at the back of the cave opened; goblins came out and 
grabbed the hobbit and the dwarves and our troop of 
ponies - ’ 

‘Troop of ponies? What were you - a travelling circus? 
Or were you carrying lots of goods? Or do you always call 
six a troop?’ 

‘O no! As a matter of fact there were more than six 
ponies, for there were more than six of us - and well, here 
are two more!’ Just at that moment Balin and Dwalin 
appeared and bowed so low that their beards swept the 
stone floor. The big man was frowning at first, but they 
did their very best to be frightfully polite, and kept on 
nodding and bending and bowing and waving their 
hoods before their knees (in proper dwarf-fashion), till he 
stopped frowning and burst into a chuckling laugh: they 
looked so comical. 

‘Troop, was right,’ he said. ‘A fine comic one. Come in 
my merry men, and what are your names? I don’t want 
your service Just now, only your names; and then sit 
down and stop wagging!’ 

lit 



QUEER LODGIVGS 

‘Balin and Dwalin/ they sasd not daring to be 
offended, and sat flop on the fli»or looking rather sur¬ 
prised. 

‘Now go on again!* said Beorn to the wizard. 

‘Where was I? O yes - I was not grabbed. I killed a 
goblin or two with a flash ~ ’ 

‘Good!* growled Beorn, ‘It s some good being a 
wizard, then.’ 

‘ - and slipped inside the crad before it dosed. I fol¬ 
lowed down into the main hall, vhidi was crowded with 
goblins. The Great Goblin was there with thirty or forty 
armed guards. I thought to myself “even if they were not 
all chained together, what can a dozen do against so 
many?’** 

‘A dozen! That’s the first time I’ve heard eight called a 
dozen. Or have you still some more jacks that haven’t yet 
come out of their boxes?* 

‘Well, yes, there seem to be a couple more here now - 
Fili and Kili, I believe,* said Gandalf, as these two now 
appeared and stood smiling and bowing. 

‘That’s enough!’ said Beorn. ‘Sit down and be quiet! 
Now go on, Gandalf! * 

So Gandalf went on with the tale, until he came to the 
fight in the dark, the discovery of the lower gate, and 
their horror when they found that Mr. Baggins had been 
mislaid. ‘We counted ourselves and found that there was 
no hobbit. There were only fourteen of us left I * 

‘Fourteen! That’s the first time I’ve heard one from 
ten leave fourteen. You mean nine, or else you haven’t 
told me yet all the names of your party.’ 

‘Well, of course you haven't seen Oin and Gloin yet. 
And, bless me! here they are. I hope you will forgive 
them for bothering you.* 

‘O let ’em all come! Hurry up! Come along, you two, 
and sit down! But look here, Gandalf, even now we have 
only got yourself and ten dwarves and the hobbit that 
was lost. That only makes eleven (plus one mislaid) and 



THE HOBBIT 


not fourteen, unless wizards count differently to other 
people. But now please get on with the tale.’ Beorn did 
not show it more than he could help, but really he had 
begun to get very interested. You see, in the old days he 
had known the very part of the mountains that Gandalf 
was describing. He nodded and he growled, when he 
heard of the hobbit’s reappearance and of their scramble 
down the stone-slide and of the wolf-ring in the 
woods. 

When Gandalf came to their climbing into trees with 
the wolves all underneath, he got up and strode about 
and muttered: ‘I wish I had been there! I would have 
given them more than fireworks! ’ 

‘Well,* said Gandalf very glad to see that his tale was 
making a good impression, ‘I did the best I could. There 
we were with the wolves going mad underneath us and 
the forest beginning to blaze in places, when the goblins 
came down from the hills and discovered us. They yelled 
with delight and sang songs making fun of us. Fifteen 
birds in five fir-trees _* 

‘Good heavens!* growled Beorn. ‘Don’t pretend that 
goblins can’t count. They can. Twelve isn’t fifteen and 
they know it.* 

‘And so do I. There were Bifur and Bofur as well. I 
haven’t ventured to introduce them before, but here they 
are.’ 

In came Bifur and Bofur. ‘And me! ’ gasped Bombur 
puffing up behind. He was fat, and also angry at being 
left till last. He refused to wait five minutes, and followed 
immediately after the other two. 

‘Well, now there are fifteen of you; and since goblins 
can count, 1 suppose that is all that there were up the 
trees. Now perhaps we can finish this story without any 
more interruptions.’ Mr. Baggins saw then how clever 
Gandalf had been. The interruptions had really made 
Beorn more interested in the story, and the story had 
kept him from sending the dwarves off at once like 

114 



QUEER LODGIVGS 

suspicious beggars. He never invited people into his 
house, if he could help it. He had very few friends and 
they lived a good way away; and he never invited more 
than a couple of these to his housr at a time. Now he had 
got fifteen strangers sitting in his porch I 

By the time the wizard had finished his tale and had 
told of the eagles’ rescue and of how they had all been 
brought to the Carrock, the sun had fallen behind the 
peaks of the Misty Mountains and the shadows were long 
in Beorn’s garden. 

‘A very good tale I * said he. ‘The best I have heard for a 
long while. If all beggars could tell such a good one, they 
might find me kinder. You may be making it all up, of 
course, but you deserve a supper for the story all the 
same. Let’s have something to eat!’ 

‘Yes please!’ they all said together. ‘Thank you very 
much!' 

Inside the hall it was now quite dark. Beorn clapped 
his hands, and in trotted four beautiful white ponies and 
several large long-bodied grey dogs. Beom said something 
to them in a queer language like animal noises turned 
into talk. They went out again and soon came back carry¬ 
ing torches in their mouths, which they lit at the fire and 
stuck in low brackets on the pillars of the hall about the 
central hearth. The dogs could stand on their hind-legs 
when they wished, and carry things with their fore-feet. 
Quickly they got out boards and trestles from the side 
walls and set them up near the fire. 

Then baa - baa - baa! was heard, and in came some 
snow-white sheep led by a large coal-black ram. One bore 
a white cloth embroidered at the edges with figures of 
animals; others bore on their broad backs trays with 
howls and platters and knives and wooden spoons, which 
the dogs took and quickly laid on the trestle-tables. These 
were very low, low enough even for Bilbo to sit at com¬ 
fortably. Beside them a pony pushed two low-seated 



THE HOBBIT 


benches with wide rush-bottoms and little short thick legs 
for Gandalf and Thorin, while at the far end he put 
Beorn’s big black chair of the same sort (in which he sat 
with his great legs stuck far out under the table). These 
were all the chairs he had in his hall, and he probably 
had them low like the tables for the convenience of the 
wonderful animals that waited on him. What did the rest 
sit on? They were not forgotten. The other ponies came 
in rolling round drum-shaped sections of logs, smoothed 
and polished, and low enough even for Bilbo; so soon 
they were all seated at Beorn’s table, and the hall had not 
seen such a gathering for many a year. 

There they had a supper, or a dinner, such as they had 
not had since they left the Last Homely House in the 
West and said good-bye to Elrond. The light of the 
torches and the fire flickered about them, and on the 
table were two tall red beeswax candles. All the time they 
ate, Beorn in his deep rolling voice told tales of the wild 
lands on this side of the mountains, and especially of the 
dark and dangerous wood, that lay outstretched far to 
North and South a day’s ride before them, barring their 
way to the East, the terrible forest of Mirk wood. 

The dwarves listened and shook their beards, for they 
knew that they must soon venture into that forest and 
that after the mountains it was the worst of the perils 
they had to pass before they came to the dragon's strong¬ 
hold. When dinner was over they began to tell tales of 
their own, but Beorn seemed to be growing drowsy and 
paid little heed to them. They spoke most of gold and 
silver and jewels and the making of things by smith-craft, 
and Beorn did not appear to care for such things: there 
were no things of gold or silver in his hall, and few save 
the knives were made of metal at all. 

They sat long at the table with their wooden drinking- 
bowls filled with mead. The dark night came on outside. 
The fires in the middle of the hall were built with fresh 
logs and the torches were put out, and still they sat in the 

116 



QUEER LODGINGS 

light of the dancing flames with the pillars of the house 
standing tall behind them, and dark at the top like trees 
of the forest. Whether it was magic or not, it seemed to 
Bilbo that he heard a sound like wind in the branches 
stirring in the rafters, and the 1 oot of owls. Soon he 
began to nod with sleep and the voices seemed to grow 
far away, until he woke with a start. 

The great door had creaked and slammed. Beorn was 
gone. The dwarves were sitting cioss-legged on the floor 
round the fire, and presently they began to sing. Some of 
the verses were like this, but there were many more, and 
their singing went on for a long while: 

The wind was on the withered heath, 
but in the forest stirred 7io leaf: 
there shadows lay by night and day, 
and dark things silent crept beneath. 

The wind came down from mountains cold, 
and like a tide it roared and rolled; 
the branches groaned, the forest moaned, 
and leaves were laid upon the mould. 

The wind went on from West to East 
all movement in the forest ceased, 
but shrill and harsh across the marsh 
its whistling voices were released. 

The grasses hissed, their tassels bent, 
the reeds were rattling - on it went 
o’er shaken pool under heavens cool 
where racing clouds were torn and rent. 

It passed the lonely Mountain bare 
and swept above the dragon’s lair: 
there black and dark lay boulders stark 
and flying smoke was in the air. 

117 



THE HOBBIT 


It left the world and took its flight 
over the wide seas of the night. 

The moon set sail upon the gale, 
and stars were fanned to leaping light. 

Bilbo began to nod again. Suddenly up stood 
Gandalf. 

‘It is time for us to sleep/ he said, ‘ - for us, but not I 
think for Beorn. In this hall we can rest sound and safe, 
but I warn you all not to forget what Beorn said before 
he left us: you must not stray outside until the sun is up, 
on your peril.’ 

Bilbo found that beds had already been laid at the side 
of the hall, on a sort of raised platform between the 
pillars and the outer wall. For him there was a little 
mattress of straw and woollen blankets. He snuggled into 
them very gladly, summertime though it was. The fire 
burned low and he fell asleep. Yet in the night he woke: 
the fire had now sunk to a few embers; the dwarves and 
Gandalf were all asleep, to judge by their breathing; a 
splash (rf white on the floor came from the high moon, 
which was peering down through the smoke-hole in the 
roof. 

There was a growling sound outside, and a noise as of 
some great animal scuffling at the door. Bilbo wondered 
what it was, and whether it could be Beorn in enchanted 
shape, and if he would come in as a bear and kill them. 
He dived under the blankets and hid his head, and fell 
asleep again at last in spite of his fears. 

It was full morning when he awoke. One of the 
dwarves had fallen over him in the shadows where he lay, 
and had rolled down with a bump from the platform on 
to the floor. It was Bofur, and he was grumbling about it, 
when Bilbo opened his eyes. 

‘Get up lazybones,’ he said, ‘or there will be no break¬ 
fast left for you.’ 

118 



QUEER LODGINGS 

Up jumped Bilbo. ‘Breakfast * he cried. ‘Where is 
breakfast?* 

‘Mostly inside us,* answered the other dwarves who 
were moving about the hall; ‘but vvhat is left is out on the 
veranda. We have been about l<)oking for Beorn ever 
since the sun got up; but there is no sign of him any¬ 
where, though we found breakfast laid as soon as we went 
out.’ 

‘Where is Gandalf?* asked Bilbo, moving off to find 
something to eat as quick as he could. 

‘O! out and about somewhere,’ they told him. But he 
saw no sign of the wizard all that day until the evening. 
Just before sunset he walked into the hall, where the 
hobbit and the dwarves were having supper, waited on 
bv Beorn’s wonderful animals, as they had been all day. 
Of Beorn they had seen and heard nothing since the 
night before, and they were getting puzzled. 

‘Where is our host, and where have you been all day 
yourself?’ they all cried. 

‘One question at a time - and none till after supper! I 
haven’t had a bite since breakfast.’ 

At last Gandalf pushed away his plate and jug - he 
had eaten two whole loaves (with masses of butter and 
honey and clotted cream) and drunk at least a quart of 
mead - and he took out his pipe. ‘I will answer the 
second question first,’ he said, ‘ - but bless me! this is a 
splendid place for smoke rings!’ Indeed for a long time 
they could get nothing more out of him, he was so busy 
sending smoke rings dodging round the pillars of the 
hall, changing them into all sorts of different shapes and 
colours, and setting them at last chasing one another out 
of the hole in the roof. They must have looked very queer 
from outside, popping out into the air one after another, 
green, blue, red, silver-grey, yellow, white; big ones, little 
ones; little ones dodging through big ones and joining 
into figure-eights, ancl going off like a flock of birds into 
the distance. 


119 



THE HOBBIT 


‘I have been picking out bear-tracks,’ he said at last. 
‘There must have been a regular bears* meeting outside 
here last night. I soon saw that Beorn could not have 
made them all: there were far too many of them, and 
they were of various sizes too. I should say there were 
little bears, large bears, ordinary bears, and gigantic big 
bears, all dancing outside from dark to nearly dawn. 
They came from almost every direction, except from the 
west over the river, from the Mountains. In that direction 
only one set of footprints led - none coming, only ones 
going away from here. I followed these as far as the 
Carrock. There they disappeared into the river, but the 
water was too deep and strong beyond the rock for me to 
cross. It is easy enough, as you remember, to get from this 
bank to the Carrock by the ford, but on the other side is a 
cliff standing up from a swirling channel. I had to walk 
miles before I found a place where tlie river was wide and 
shallow enough for me to wade and swim, and then miles 
back again to pick up the tracks again. By that time it 
was too late for me to follow them far. They went straight 
off in the direction of the pine-woods on the east side of 
the Misty Mountains, where we had our pleasant little 
party with the Wargs the night before last. And now I 
think I have answered your first question, too,’ ended 
Gandalf, and he sat a long while silent. 

Bilbo thought he knew what the wizard meant. ‘What 
shall we do,’ he cried, ‘if he leads all the Wargs and the 
goblins down here? We shall all be caught and killed! I 
thought you said he was not a friend of theirs.’ 

‘So I did. And don’t be silly! You had better go to bed, 
your wits are sleepy.’ 

The hobbit felt quite crushed, and as there seemed 
nothing else to do he did go to bed; and while the 
dwarves were still singing songs he dropped asleep, still 
puzzling his little head about Beorn, till he dreamed a 
dream of hundreds of black bears dancing slow heavy 
dances round and round in the moonlight in the court- 

120 



QUEER LODGINGS 

yard. Then he woke up when e^eryone else was asleep, 
and he heard the same scraping, scuffling, snuffling, and 
growling as before. 

Next morning they were all wakened by Beorn himself. 
‘So here you all are still!* he slid. He picked up the 
hobbit and laughed: ‘Not eaten up by Wargs or goblins 
or wicked bears yet I see’; and he poked Mr. Baggins’ 
waistcoat most disrespectfully. ‘Little bunny is getting 
nice and fat again on bread and honey,’ he chuckled. 
‘Come and have some more! ’ 

So they all went to breakfast with him. Beorn was most 
jolly for a change; indeed he seemed to be in a splendidly 
good humour and set them all laughing with his funny 
stories; nor did they have to wonder long where he had 
been or why he was so nice to them, for he told them 
himself. He had been over the river and right back up 
into the mountains - from which you can guess that he 
could travel quickly, in bear’s shape at any rate. From the 
burnt wolf-glade he had .soon found out that part of their 
story was true; but he had found more than that: he had 
caught a Warg and a goblin wandering in the woods. 
From these he had got news: the goblin patrols were still 
hunting with Wargs for the dwarves, and they were 
fiercely angry because of the death of the Great Goblin, 
and also because of the burning of the chief wolf’s nose 
and the death from the wizard’s fire of many of his chief 
servants. So much they told him when he forced them, 
but he guessed there was more wickedness than this afoot, 
and that a great raid of the whole goblin army with their 
wolf-allies into the lands shadowed by the mountains 
might soon be made to find the dwarves, or to take 
vengeance on the men and creatures that lived there, and 
who they thought must be sheltering them. 

‘It was a good story, that of yours,’ said Beorn, ‘but I 
like it still better now I am sure it is true. You must 
forgive my not taking your word. If you lived near the 
edge of Mirkwood, you would take the word of no one 



THE HOBBIT 


that you did not know as well as your brother or better. 
As it is, I can only say that 1 have hurried home as fast as 
I could to see that you were safe, and to offer you any 
help that I can. I shall think more kindly of dwarves after 
this. Killed the Great Goblin, killed the Great Goblin!’ 
he chuckled fiercely to himself. 

‘What did you do with the goblin and the Warg?’ 
asked Bilbo suddenly. 

‘Come and seel’ said Beorn, and they followed round 
the house. A goblin’s head was stuck outside the gate and 
a warg-skin was nailed to a tree just beyond. Beorn was a 
fierce enemy. But now he was their friend, and Gandalf 
thought it wise to tell him their whole story and the 
reason of their journey, so that they could get the most 
help he could offer. 

This is what he promised to do for them. He would 
provide ponies for each of them, and a horse for Gandalf, 
for their journey to the forest, and he would lade them 
with food to last them for weeks with care, and packed so 
as to be as easy as possible to carry - nuts, flour, sealed 
jars of dried fruits, and red earthenware pots of honey, 
and twice-baked cakes that would keep good a long time, 
and on a little of which they could march far. The 
making of these was one of his secrets; but honey was in 
them, as in most of his foods, and they were good to eat, 
though they made one thirsty. Water, he said, they would 
not need to carry this side of the forest, for there were 
streams and springs along the road. ‘But your way 
through Mirkwood is dark, dangerous and difficult,’ he 
said. ‘Water is not easy to find there, nor food. The time 
is not yet come for nuts (although it may be past and 
gone indeed before you get to the other side), and nuts 
are about all that grows there fit for food; in there the 
wild things are dark, queer, and savage. I will provide 
you with skins for carrying water, and I will give you 
some bows and arrows. But I doubt very much whether 
anything you find in Mirkwood will be wholesome to eat 



QUEER LODGINGS 

or to drink. There is one stream there, I know, black and 
strong which crosses the path. 1 hat you should neither 
drink of, nor bathe in; for I have heard that it carries 
enchantment and a great drowsiness and forgetfulness. 
And in the dim shadows of that place I don’t think you 
will shoot anything, wholesome or unwholesome, without 
straying from the path. That you must not do, for any 
reason. 

‘That is all the advice I can give you. Beyond the edge 
of the forest I cannot help you much; you must depend 
on your luck and your courage and the food I send with 
you. At the gate of the forest I must ask you to send back 
my horse and my ponies. But I wish you all speed, and 
my house is open to you, if ever you come back this way 
again.’ 

They thanked him, of course, with many bows and 
sweepings of their hoods and with many an ‘at your 
service, O master of the wide wooden halls!’ But their 
spirits sank at his grave words, and they all felt that the 
adventure was far more dangerous than they had 
thought, while all the time, even if they passed all the 
perils of the road, the dragon was waiting at the end. 

All that morning they were busy with preparations. 
Soon after midday they ate with Beorn for the last time, 
and after the meal they mounted the steeds he was lend¬ 
ing them, and bidding him many farewells they rode off 
through his gate at a good pace. 

As soon as they left his high hedges at the east of his 
fenced lands they turned north and then bore to the 
north-west. By his advice they were no longer making for 
the main forest-road to the south of his land. Had they 
followed the pass, their path would have led them down 
a stream from the mountains that joined the great river 
miles south of the Carrock. At that point there was a deep 
ford which they might have passed, if they had still had 
their ponies, and beyond that a track led to the skirts of 

uj 



THE HOBBIT 


the wood and to the entrance of the old forest road. But 
Beorn had warned them that that way was now often 
used by the goblins, while the forest-road itself, he had 
heard, was overgrown and disused at the eastern end and 
led to impassable marshes where the paths had long been 
lost. Its eastern opening had also always been far to the 
south of the Lonely Mountain, and would have left them 
still with a long and difficult northward march when they 
got to the other side. North of the Carrock the edge of 
Mirkwood drew closer to the borders of the Great River, 
and though here the Mountains too drew down nearer, 
Beorn advised them to take this way; for at a place a few 
days’ ride due north of the Carrock was the gate of a little- 
known pathway through Mirkwood that led almost 
straight towards the Lonely Mountain. 

‘The goblins,’ Beorn had said, ‘will not dare to cross 
the Great River for a hundred miles north of the Carrock 
nor to come near my house - it is well protected at night! 
- but I should ride fast; for if they make their raid soon 
they will cross the river to the south and scour all the 
edge of the forest so as to cut you off, and Wargs run 
swifter than ponies. Still you are safer going north, even 
though you seem to be going back nearer to their strong¬ 
holds; for that is what they will least expect, and they 
will have the longer ride to catch you. Be off now as 
quick as you may I ’ 

That is why they were now riding in silence, galloping 
wherever the ground was grassy and .smooth, with the 
mountains dark on their left, and in the distance the line 
of the river with its trees drawing ever closer. The sun 
had only just turned west when they started, and till 
evening it lay golden on the land about them. It was 
difficult to think of pursuing goblins behind, and when 
they had put many miles between them and Beorn's 
house they began to talk and to sing again and to forget 
the dark forest-path that lay in front. But in the evening 
when the dusk came on and the peaks of the mountains 

1*4 



QUEER LODGINGS 

glowered against the sunset they made a camp and set a 
guard, and most of them slept uneasily with dreams in 
which there came the howl of hunting wolves and the 
cries of goblins. 

Still the next morning dawned bright and fair again. 
There was an autumn-like mist vvhite upon the ground 
and the air was chill, but soon (he sun rose red in the 
East and the mists vanished, and while the shadows were 
still long they were off again. So they rode now for two 
more days, and all the while the\ saw nothing save grass 
and flowers and birds and scattered trees, and occasion¬ 
ally small herds of red deer browsing or sitting at noon in 
the shade. Sometimes Bilbo saw the horns of the harts 
sticking up out of the long grass, and at first he thought 
they were the dead branches of trees. That third evening 
they were so eager to press on, for Beorn had said that 
they should reach the forest-gate early on the fourth-day, 
that they rode still forward after dusk and into the night 
beneath the moon. As the light faded Bilbo thought he 
saw away to the right, or to the left, the shadowy form of 
a great bear prowling along in the same direction. But if 
he dared to mention it to Gandalf, the wizard only said: 
‘Hush! Take no notice!' 

Next day they started before dawn, though their night 
had been short. As soon as it was light they could see the 
forest coming as it were to meet them, or waiting for 
them like a black and frowning wall before them. The 
land began to slope up and up, and it seemed to the 
hobbit that a silence began to draw in upon them. Birds 
began to sing less. There were no more deer; not even 
rabbits were to be seen. By the afternoon they had 
reached the eaves of Mirkwood, and were resting almost 
beneath the great overhanging boughs of its outer trees. 
Their trunks were huge and gnarled, their branches 
twisted, their leaves were dark and long. Ivy grew on 
them and trailed along the ground. 

*Well, here is Mirkwood I' said Gandalf. ‘The greatest 



THE HOBBIT 


of the forests of the Northern world. I hope you liked the 
look of it. Now you must send back these excellent ponies 
you have borrowed.’ 

The dwarves were inclined to grumble at this, but the 
wizard told them they were fools. ‘Beorn is not as far oft 
as you seem to think, and you had better keep your 
promises anyway, for he is a bad enemy. Mr. Baggins’ eyes 
are sharper than yours, if you have not seen each night 
after dark a great bear going along with us or sitting far 
off in the moon watching our camps. Not only to guard 
you and guide you, but to keep an eye on the ponies too. 
Beorn may be your friend, but he loves his animals as his 
children. You do not guess what kindness he has shown 
you in letting dwarves ride them so far and so fast, nor 
what would happen to you, if you tried to take them into 
the forest.’ 

‘What about the horse, then?’ said Thorin. ‘You don’t 
mention sending that back.’ 

‘I don’t, because I am not sending it.’ 

‘What about your promise then?’ 

‘I will look after that. I am not sending the horse back, 
I am riding it! ’ 

Then they knew that Gandalf was going to leave 
them at the very edge of Mirkwood, and they were in 
despair. But nothing they could say would change his 
mind. 

‘Now we had this all out before, when we landed on 
the Carrock,' he said. ‘It is no use arguing. I have, as I 
told you, some pressing business away south; and I am 
already late through bothering with you people. We may 
meet again before all is over, and then again of course we 
may not. That depends on your luck and on your courage 
and sense; and I am sending Mr. Baggins with you. I 
have told you before that he has more about him than 
you guess, and you will find that out before long. So cheer 
up Bilbo and don’t look so glum. Cheer up Thorin and 
Company! This is your expedition after all. Think of the 

ia6 



QUEER LODGfNGS 

treasure at the end, and forget the forest and the dragon, 
at any rate until tomorrow morning!' 

When tomorrow morning came he still said the 
same. So now there was nothin<< left to do but to fill 
their water-skins at a clear spring they found close to the 
forest-gate, and unpack the ponit s. They distributed the 
packages as fairly as they could, tiiough Bilbo thought his 
lot was wearisomely heavy, and did not at all like the 
idea of trudging for miles and miles with all that on his 
back. 

‘Don’t you worry! ’ said Thorin. ‘It will get lighter all 
too soon. Before long I expect wc shall all wish our packs 
heavier, when the food begins to run short.' 

Then at last they said good-bye to their ponies and 
turned their heads for home. Off they trotted gaily, seem¬ 
ing very glad to put their tails towards the shadow of 
Mirkwood. As they went away Bilbo could have sworn 
that a thing like a bear left the shadow of the trees and 
shambled off quickly after them. 

Now Gandalf too said farewell. Bilbo sat on the 
ground feeling very unhappy and wishing he was beside 
the wizard on his tall horse. He had gone just inside the 
forest after breakfast (a very poor one), and it seemed as 
dark in there in the morning as at night, and very secret: 
‘a sort of watching and waiting feeling,’ he said to him¬ 
self. 

‘Good-bye! ’ said Gandalf to Thorin. ‘And good-bye to 
you all, good-bye! Straight through the forest is your way 
now. Don’t stray off the track! - if you do, it is a thou¬ 
sand to one you will never find it again and never get out 
of Mirkwood; and then I don’t suppose I, or any one else, 
will ever see you again.’ 

‘Do we really have to to go through?’ groaned the 
hobbit. 

‘Yes, you do!' said the wizard, ‘if you want to get to the 
other side. You must either go through or give up your 
quest. And I am not going to allow you to back out now, 

i«7 



THE HOBBIT 


Mr. Baggins. I am ashamed of you for thinking of it. You 
have got to look after all these dwarves for me/ he 
laughed. 

‘No I nol* said Bilbo. 'I didn’t mean that. I meant, is 
there no way round?’ 

‘There is, if you care to go two hundred miles or so out 
of your way north, and twice that south. But you 
wouldn’t get a safe path even then. There are no safe 
paths in this part of the world. Remember you are over 
the Edge of the Wild now, and in for all sorts of fun 
wherever you go. Before you could get round Mirkwood 
in the North you would be right among the slopes of the 
Grey Mountains, and they are simply stiff with goblins, 
hobgoblins, and ores of the worst description. Before you 
could get round it in the South, you would get into the 
land of the Necromancer; and even you. Bilbo, won’t 
need me to tell you tales of that black sorcerer. I don't 
advise you to go anywhere near the places overlooked by 
his dark tower I Stick to the forest-track, keep your spirits 
up, hope for the best, and with a tremendous slice of luck 
you may come out one day and see the Long Marshes 
lying below you, and beyond them, high in the East, the 
Lonely Mountain where dear old Smaug lives, though I 
hope he is not expecting you.’ 

‘Very comforting you are to be sure,’ growled Thorin. 
‘Good-bye! If you won’t come with us, you had better get 
off without any more talk!’ 

‘Good-bye then, and really good-bye 1’ said Gandalf, 
and he turned his horse and rode down into the West. 
But he could not resist the temptation to have the last 
word. Before he had passed quite out of hearing he 
turned and put his hands to his mouth and called to 
them. They heard his voice come faintly: ‘Good-bye! Be 
good, take care of yourselves - and don’t leave the 
path!’ 

Then he galloped away and was soon lost to sight. ‘O 
good-bye and go away!' grunted the dwarves, all the 

is8 



FLIES AND SPIDERS 


more angry because they were really filled with dismay at 
losing him. Now began the most dangerous part of all the 
journey. They each shouldered the heavy pack and the 
water-skin which was their share, and turned from the 
light that lay on the lands outsidr and plunged into the 
forest. 


8 Flies and spiders 

They walked in single file. The entrance to the path was 
like a sort of arch leading into a gloomy tunnel made by 
two great trees that leant together, too old and strangled 
with ivy and hung with lichen to bear more than a few 
blackened leaves. The path itself was narrow and wound 
in and out among the trunks. Soon the light at the gate 
was like a little bright hole far behind, and the quiet was 
so deep that their feet seemed to thump along while all 
the trees leaned over them and listened. 

As their eyes became used to the dimness they could see 
a little way to either side in a sort of darkened green 
glimmer. Occasionally a slender beam of sun that had the 
luck to slip in through some opening in the leaves far 
above, and still more luck in not being caught in the 
tangled boughs and matted twigs beneath, stabbed down 
thin and bright before them. But this was seldom, and it 
soon ceased altogether. 

There were black squirrels in the wood. As Bilbo’s 
sharp inquisitive eyes got used to seeing things he could 
catch glimpses of them whisking off the path and 
scuttling behind tree-trunks. There were queer noises 
too, grunts, scufHings, and hurryings in the undergrowth, 
and among the leaves that lay piled endlessly thick in 
places on the forest-floor; but what made the noises he 

i«9 



THE HOBBIT 


could not see. The nastiest things they saw were the cob¬ 
webs: dark dense cobwebs with threads extraordinarily 
thick, often stretched from tree to tree, or tangled in the 
lower branches on either side of them. There were none 
stretched across the path, but whether because some 
magic kept it clear, or for what other reason they could 
not guess. 

It was not long before they grew to hate the forest as 
heartily as they had hated the tunnels of the goblins, and 
it seemed to offer even less hope of any ending. But they 
had to go on and on, long after they were sick for a sight 
of the sun and of the sky, and longed for the feel of wind 
on their faces. There was no movement of air down 
under the forest-roof, and it was everlastingly still and 
dark and stuffy. Even the dwarves felt it, who were used 
to tunnelling, and lived at times for long whiles without 
the light of the sun; but the hobbit, who liked holes to 
make a house in but not to spend summer days in, felt 
that he was being slowly suffocated. 

The nights were the worst. It then became pitch-dark ~ 
not what you call pitch-dark, but really pitch : so black 
that you really could see nothing. Bilbo tried flapping his 
hand in front of his nose, but he could not see it at all. 
Well, perhaps it is not true to say that they could see 
nothing: they could see eyes. They slept all closely 
huddled together, and took it in turns to watch; and 
when it was Bilbo’s turn he would see gleams in the dark¬ 
ness round them, and sometimes pairs of yellow or red or 
green eyes would stare at him from a little distance, and 
then slowly fade and disappear and slowly shine out 
again in another place. And sometimes they would gleam 
down from the branches just above him; and that was 
most terrifying. But the eyes that he liked the least were 
horrible pale bulbous sort of eyes. ‘Insect eyes’ he 
thought, ‘not animal eyes, only they are much too big.’ 

Although it was not yet very cold, they tried lighting 
watch-fires at night, but they soon gave that up. It seemed 

ijo 



FLIES AND SPIDERS 

to bring hundreds and hundreds of eyes all round them, 
though the creatures, whatever ihey were, were careful 
never to let their bodies show in the little flicker of the 
flames. Worse still it brought thousands of dark-grey and 
black moths, some nearly as big is your hand, flapping 
and whirring round their ears. They could not stand 
that, nor the huge bats, black as a top-hat, either; so they 
gave up fires and sat at night and dozed in the enormous 
uncanny darkness. 

All this went on for what seemed to the hobbit ages 
upon ages; and he was always hungry, for they were 
extremely careful with their provisions. Even so, as days 
followed days, and still the forest seemed just the same, 
they began to get anxious. The food would not last for 
ever: it was in fact already beginning to get low. They 
tried shooting at the squirrels, and they wasted many 
arrows before they managed to bring one down on the 
path. But when they roasted it, it proved horrible to 
taste, and they shot no more squirrels. 

They were thirsty too, for they had none too much 
water, and in all the time they had seen neither spring 
nor stream. This was their state when one day they found 
their path blocked by a running water. It flowed fast and 
strong but not very wide right across the way, and it was 
black, or looked it in the gloom. It was well that Beorn 
had warned them against it, or they would have drunk 
from it, whatever its colour, and filled some of their 
emptied skins at its bank. As it was they only thought of 
how to cross it without wetting themselves in its water. 
There had been a bridge of wood across, but it had rotted 
and fallen leaving only the broken posts near the bank. 

Bilbo kneeling on the brink and peering forward 
cried: ‘There is a boat against the far bank! Now why 
couldn’t it have been this side!’ 

‘How far away do you think it is?* asked Thorin, 
for by now they knew Bilbo had the sharpest eyes among 
them. 



THE HOBBIT 


‘Not at all far. I shouldn’t think above twelve yards.* 

‘Twelve yards I I should have thought it was thirty at 
least, but my eyes don’t see as well as they used a hundred 
years ago. Still twelve yards is as good as a mile. We can’t 
jump it, and we daren’t try to wade or swim.’ 

‘Can any of you throw a rope?’ 

‘What’s the good of that? The boat is sure to be tied up 
even if we could hook it, which I doubt.* 

‘I don’t believe it is tied,* said Bilbo, ‘though of course 
I can’t be sure in this light; but it looks to me as if it was 
just drawn up on the bank, which is low just there where 
the path goes down into the water.’ 

‘Dori is the strongest, but Fili is the youngest and still 
has the best sight,’ said Thorin. ‘Come here Fili, and see 
if you can see the boat Mr. Baggins is talking about.’ 

Fili thought he could; so when he had stared a long 
while to get an idea of the direction, the others brought 
him a rope. They had several with them, and on the end 
of the longest they fastened one of the large iron hooks 
they had used for catching their packs to the straps about 
their shoulders. Fili took this in his hand, balanced it for 
a moment, and then flung it across the stream. 

Splash it fell in the water! ‘Not far enough!’ said 
Bilbo who was peering forward. ‘A couple of feet and you 
would have dropped it on to the boat. Try again. I don’t 
suppose the magic is strong enough to hurt you, if you 
just touch a bit of wet rope.’ 

Fili picked up the hook when he had drawn it back, 
rather doubtfully all the same. This time he threw it with 
greater strength. 

‘Steady 1 ’ said Bilbo, ‘you have thrown it right into the 
wood on the other side now. Draw it back gently.’ Fili 
hauled the rope back slowly, and after a while Bilbo 
said: ‘Carefully! It is lying on the boat; let’s hope the 
hook will catch.* 

It did. The rope went taut, and Fili pulled in vain. 
Kili came to his help, and then Oin and Gloin. They 

13* 



FLIES AND SLIDERS 

tugged and tugged, and suddenly they all fell over on 
their backs. Bilbo was on the lo<)k out, however, caught 
the rope, and with a piece of stick fended oflE the little 
black boat as it came rushing across the stream. ‘Helpl’ 
he shouted, and Balin was just m time to seize the boat 
before it floated off down the current. 

It was tied after all,* said he, looking at the snapped 
painter that was still dangling fi om it. ‘That was a good 
pull, my lads; and a good job that our rope waf the 
stronger.* 

‘Who*ll cross first?’ asked Billx). 

‘I shall,* said Thorin, ‘and you will come with me, and 
Fili and Balin. That*s as many as the boat will hold at a 
time. After that Kili and Oin and Gloin and Dori; next 
Ori and Nori, Bifur and Bofur; and last Dwalin and 
Bombur.’ 

‘I’m always last and I don’t like it,’ said Bombur. ‘It*s 
somebody else*s turn today.* 

‘You should not be so fat. As you are, you must be with 
the last and lightest boatload. Don’t start grumbling 
against orders, or something bad will happen to you.’ 

‘There aren’t any oars. How are you going to push the 
boat back to the far bank?’ asked the hobbit. 

‘Give me another length of rope and another hook,’ 
said Fili, and when they had got it ready, he cast it into 
the darkness ahead and as high as he could throw it. 
Since it did not fall down again, they saw that it must 
have stuck in the branches. ‘Get in now,’ said Fili, ‘and 
one of you haul on the rope that is stuck in a tree on the 
other side. One of the others must keep hold of the hook 
we used at first, and when we are safe on the other side he 
can hook it on, and you can draw the boat back.’ 

In this way they were all soon on the far bank safe 
across the enchanted stream. Dwalin had just scrambled 
out with the coiled rope on his arm, and Bombur (still 
grumbling) was getting ready to follow, when something 
bad did happen. There was a flying sound of hooves on 

m 



THE HOBBIT 


the path ahead. Out of the gloom came suddenly the 
shape of a flying deer. It charged into the dwarves and 
bowled them over, then gathered itself for a leap. High it 
sprang and cleared the water with a mighty jump. But it 
did not reach the other side in safety. Thorin was the 
only one who had kept his feet and his wits. As soon as 
they had landed he had bent his bow and fitted an arrow 
in case any hidden guardian of the boat appeared. Now 
he sent a swift and sure shot into the leaping beast. As it 
reached the further bank it stumbled. The shadows 
swallowed it up, but they heard the sound of hooves 
quickly falter and then go still. 

Before they could shout in praise of the shot, however, 
a dreadful wail from Bilbo put all thoughts of venison 
out of their minds. ‘Bombur has fallen in! Bombur is 
drowning!' he cried. It was only too true. Bombur had 
only one foot on the land when the hart bore down on 
him, and sprang over him. He had stumbled, thrusting 
the boat away from the bank, and then toppled back into 
the dark water, his hands slipping off the slimy roots at 
the edge, while the boat span slowly off and disappeared. 

They could still see his hood above the water when 
they ran to the bank. Quickly they flung a rope with a 
hook towards him. His hand caught it, and they pulled 
him to the shore. He was drenched from hair to boots, of 
course, but that was not the worst. When they laid him 
on the bank he was already fast asleep, with one hand 
clutching the rope so tight that they could not get it from 
his grasp; and fast asleep he remained in spite of all they 
could do. 

They were still standing over him, cursing their ill 
luck, and Bombur’s clumsiness, and lamenting the loss of 
the boat which made it impossible for them to go back 
and look for the hart, when they became aware of the 
dim blowing of horns in the wood and the sound as of 
dogs baying far off. Then they all fell silent; and as they 
sat it seemed they could hear the noise of a great hunt 

>34 



FLIES AND SFIDERS 

going by to the north of the piith, though they saw no 
sign of it. 

There they sat for a long while and did not dare to 
make a move. Bombur slept on with a smile on his fat 
face, as if he no longer cared for all the troubles that 
vexed them. Suddenly on the pa fh ahead appeared some 
white deer, a hind and fawns as snowy white as the hart 
had been dark. They glimmereci in the shadows. Before 
Thorin could cry out three of the dwarves had leaped to 
their feet and loosed off arrows from their bows. None 
seemed to find their mark. The deer turned and vanished 
in the trees as silently as they had come, and in vain the 
dwarves shot their arrows after them. 

‘StopI stop!* shouted Thorin; but it was too late, the 
excited dwarves had wasted their last arrows, and now 
the bows that Beorn had given them were useless. 

They were a gloomy party that night, and the gloom 
gathered still deeper on them in the following days. They 
had crossed the enchanted stream; but beyond it the path 
seemed to straggle on just as before, and in the forest they 
could see no change. Yet if they had known more about it 
and considered the meaning of the hunt and the white 
deer that had appeared upon their path, they would have 
known that they were at last drawing towards the eastern 
edge, and would soon have come, if they could have kept 
up their courage and their hope, to thinner trees and 
places where the sunlight came again. 

But they did not know this, and they were burdened 
with the heavy body of Bombur, which they had to carry 
along with them as best they could, taking the wearisome 
task in turns of four each while the others shared their 
packs. If these had not become all too light in the last few 
days, they would never have managed it; but a slumber¬ 
ing and smiling Bombur was a poor exchange for packs 
filled with food however heavy. In a few days a time came 
when there was practically nothing left to eat or to drink. 
Nothing wholesome could they see growing in the wood, 

135 



THE HOBBIT 


only funguses and herbs with pale leaves and unpleasant 
smell. 

About four days from the enchanted stream they came 
to a part where most of the trees were beeches. They were 
at first inclined to be cheered by the change, for here 
there was no undergrowth and the shadow was not so 
deep. There was a greenish light to either side of the 
path. Yet the light only showed them endless lines of 
straight grey trunks like the pillars of some huge twilight 
hall. There was a breath of air and a noise of wind, but it 
had a sad sound. A few leaves came rustling down to 
remind them that outside autumn was coming on. Their 
feet ruffled among the dead leaves of countless other 
autumns that drifted over the banks of the path from the 
deep red carpets of the forest. 

Still Bombur slept and they grew very weary. At times 
they heard disquieting laughter. Sometimes there was 
singing in the distance too. The laughter was the laugh¬ 
ter of fair voices not of goblins, and the singing was 
beautiful, but it sounded eerie and strange, and they 
were not comforted, rather they hurried on from those 
parts with what strength they had left. 

Two days later they found their path going down¬ 
wards, and before long they were in a valley filled almost 
entirely with a mighty growth of oaks. 

‘Is there no end to this accursed forest?* said Thorin. 
‘Somebody must climb a tree and see if he can get his 
head above the roof and have a look round. The only 
way is to choose the tallest tree that overhangs the path.* 
Of course ‘somebody* meant Bilbo. They chose him 
because to be of any use the climber must get his head 
above the topmost leaves, and so he must be light enough 
for the highest and slenderest branches to bear him. Poor 
Mr. Baggins had never had much practice in climbing 
trees, but they hoisted him up into the lowest branches of 
an enormous oak that grew right out into the path, and 
up he had to go as best he could. He pushed his way 
^ 136 



FLIES AND SriDERS 

through the tangled twigs with n any a slap in the eye; he 
was greened and grimed from the old bark of the greater 
boughs; more than once he slipped and caught himself 
just in time; and at last after a dreadful struggle in a 
difficult place where there seem<id to be no convenient 
branches at all, he got near the top. All the time he was 
wondering whether there were spiders in the tree, and 
how he was going to get down ag lin (except by falling). 

In the end he poked his head ibove the roof of leaves, 
and then he found spiders all right. But they were only 
small ones of ordinary size, and they were after the 
butterflies. Bilbo’s eyes were nearly blinded by the light. 
He could hear the dwarves shouting up at him from far 
below, but he could not answer, only hold on and blink. 
The sun was shining brilliantly, and it was a long while 
before he could bear it. When he could, he saw all round 
him a sea of dark green, ruffled here and there by the 
breeze; and there were everywhere hundreds of butter¬ 
flies. I expect they were a kind of ‘purple emperor’, a 
butterfly Aat loves the tops of oak-woods, but these were 
not purple at all, they were a dark dark velvety black 
without any markings to be seen. 

He looked at the ‘black emperors’ for a long time, and 
enjoyed the feel of the breeze in his hair and on his face; 
but at length the cries of the dwarves, who were now 
simply stamping with impatience down below, reminded 
him of his real business. It was no good. Gaze as much as 
he might, he could see no end to the trees and the leaves 
in any direction. His heart, that had been lightened by 
the sight of the sun and the feel of the wind, sank back 
into his toes: there was no food to go back to down 
below. 

Actually, as I have told you, they were not far off the 
edge of the forest; and if Bilbo had had the sense to see it, 
the tree that he had climbed, though it was tall in itself, 
was standing near the bottom of a wide valley, so that 
from its top the trees seemed to swell up all round like 

137 



THE HOBBIT 


the edges of a great bowl, and he could not expect to see 
how far the forest lasted. Still he did not see this, and he 
climbed down full of despair. He got to the bottom again 
at last, scratched, hot, and miserable, and he could not 
see anything in the gloom below when he got there. His 
report soon made the others as miserable as he was. 

‘The forest goes on for ever and ever and ever in all 
directions! Whatever shall we do? And what is the use of 
sending a hobbit! * they cried, as if it was his fault. They 
did not care tuppence about the butterflies, and were 
only made more angry when he told them of the beauti¬ 
ful breeze, which they were too heavy to climb up and 
feel. 

That night they ate their very last scraps and crumbs of 
food; and next morning when they woke the first thing 
they noticed was that they were still gnawingly hungry, 
and the next thing was that it was raining and that here 
and there the drip of it was dropping heavily on the 
forest floor. That only reminded them that they were also 
parchingly thirsty, without doing anything to relieve 
them: you cannot quench a terrible thirst by standing 
under giant oaks and waiting for a chance drip to fall on 
your tongue. The only scrap of comfort there was came 
unexpectedly from Bombur. 

He woke up suddenly and sat up scratching his head. 
He could not make out where he was at all, nor why he 
felt so hungry; for he had forgotten everything that had 
happened since they started their journey that May 
morning long ago. The last thing that he remembered 
was the party at the hobbit's house, and they had great 
difficulty in making him believe their tale of all the many 
adventures they had had since. 

When he heard that there was nothing to eat, he sat 
down and wept, for he felt very weak and wobbly in the 
legs. ‘Why ever did I wake up!’ he cried. ‘I was having 
such beautiful dreams. I dreamed I was walking in a 

138 



FLIES AND SPIDERS 

forest rather like this one, only lit with torches on the 
trees ‘and lamps swinging from the branches and fires 
burning on the ground; and theie was a great feast going 
on, going on for ever. A woodland king was there with a 
crown of leaves, and there was a merry singing, and I 
could not count or describe the things there were to eat 
and drink.* 

‘You need not try,' said Thoiin. *in fact if you can't 
talk about something else, you had better be silent. We 
are quite annoyed enough with \ou as it is. If you hadn't 
waked up, we should have left you to your idiotic dreams 
in the forest; you are no joke to carry even after weeks of 
short commons.' 

There was nothing now to be done but to tighten the 
belts round their empty stomachs, and hoist their empty 
sacks and packs, and trudge along the track without any 
great hope of ever getting to the end before they lay 
down and died of starvation. This they did all that day, 
going very slowly and wearily, while Bombur kept on 
wailing that his legs would not carry him and that he 
wanted to lie down and sleep. 

‘No you don't 1' they said. ‘Let your legs take their 
share, we have carried you far enough.' 

All the same he suddenly refused to go a step further 
and flung himself on the ground. ‘Go on, if you must,’ he 
said. ‘I’m just going to lie here and sleep and dream of 
food, if I can’t get it any other way. I hope I never wake 
up again.' 

At that very moment Balin, who was a little way 
ahead, called out: ‘What was that? I thought I saw a 
twinkle of light in the forest.' 

They all looked, and a longish way off, it seemed, they 
saw a red twinkle in the dark; then another and another 
sprang out beside it. Even Bombur got up, and they 
hurried along then, not caring if it was trolls or goblins. 
The light was in front of them and to the left of the path, 
and when at last they had drawn level with it, it seemed 

139 



THE HOBBIT 


plain that torches and fires were burning under the trees, 
but a good way off their track. 

‘It looks as if my dreams were coming true,' gasped 
Bombur puffing up behind. He wanted to rush straight 
off into the wood after the lights. But the others re¬ 
membered only too well the warnings of the wizard and of 
Beorn. 

*A feast would be no good, if we never got back alive 
from it,' said Thorin. 

‘But without a feast we shan't remain alive much 
longer anyway,' said Bombur, and Bilbo heartily agreed 
with him. They argued about it backwards and forwards 
for a long while, until they agreed at length to send out a 
couple of spies, to creep near the lights and find out more 
about them. But then they could not agree on who was to 
be sent: no one seemed anxious to run the chance of 
being lost and never finding his friends again. In the end, 
in spite of warnings, hunger decided them, because 
Bombur kept on describing all the good things that were 
being eaten, according to his dream, in the woodland 
feast; so they all left the path and plunged into the forest 
together. 

After a good deal of creeping and crawling they peered 
round the trunks and looked into a clearing where some 
trees had been felled and the ground levelled. There 
were many people there, elvish-looking folk, all dressed 
in green and brown and sitting on sawn rings of the 
felled trees in a great circle. There was a fire in their 
midst and there were torches fastened to some of the trees 
round about; but most splendid sight of all: they were 
eating and drinking and laughing merrily. 

The smell of the roast meats was so enchanting that, 
without waiting to consult one another, every one of 
them got up and scrambled forwards into the ring with 
the one idea of begging for some food. No sooner had the 
first stepped into the clearing than all the lights went out 
as if by magic. Somebody kicked the fire and it went up 

140 



FLIES AND SPIDERS 

in rockets of glittering sparks and vanished. They were 
lost in a completely lightless dark and they could not 
even find one another, not for a long time at any rate. 
After blundering frantically in the gloom, falling over 
logs, bumping crash into trees, and shouting and calling 
till they must have waked everN thing in the forest for 
miles, at last they managed to gather themselves in a 
bundle and count themselves by 'ouch. By that time they 
had, of course, quite forgotten in what direction the path 
lay, and they were all hopeless!) lost, at least till morn¬ 
ing. 

There was nothing for it but to settle down for the 
night where they were; they did not even dare to search 
on the ground for scraps of food for fear of becoming 
separated again. But they had not been lying long, and 
Bilbo was only just getting drowsy, when Dori, whose 
turn it was to watch first, said in a loud whisper: 

‘The lights are coming out again over there, and there 
are more than ever of them.’ 

Up they all jumped. There, sure enough, not far away 
were scores of twinkling lights, and they heard the voices 
and the laughter quite plainly. They crept slowly to¬ 
wards them, in a single line, each touching the back of 
the one in front. When they got near Thorin said: ‘No 
rushing forward this time! No one is to stir from hiding 
till I say. I shall send Mr. Baggins alone first to talk to 
them. They won’t be frightened of him - (‘What about 
me of them?’ thought Bilbo) - and any way I hope they 
won’t do anything nasty to him.’ 

When they got to the edge of the circle of lights they 
pushed Bilbo suddenly from behind. Before he had time 
to slip on his ring, he stumbled forward into the full 
blaze of the fire and torches. It was no good. Out went all 
the lights again and complete darkness fell. 

If it had been difficult collecting themselves before, it 
was far worse this time. And they simply could not find 
the hobbit. Every time they counted themselves it only 

141 



THE HOBBIT 


made thirteen. They shouted and called: ‘Bilbo Bag- 
gins I Hobbit! You dratted hobbit! Hi! Hobbit, con- 
fusticate you, where are you?* and other things of that 
sort, but there was no answer. 

They were just giving up hope, when Dori stumbled 
across him by sheer luck. In the dark he fell over what he 
thought was a log, and he found it was the hobbit curled 
up fast asleep. It took a deal of shaking to wake him, and 
when he was awake he was not pleased at all. 

‘I was having such a lovely dream,’ he grumbled, ‘all 
about having a most gorgeous dinner.* 

‘Good heavens! He has gone like Bombur,* they said. 
‘Don’t tell us about dreams. Dream dinners aren’t any 
good, and we can’t share them.’ 

‘They are the best I am likely to get in this beastly 
place,’ he muttered, as he lay down beside the dwarves 
and tried to go back to sleep and find his dream again. 

But that was not the last of the lights in the forest. 
Later when the night must have been getting old, Kili 
who was watching then, came and roused them all again, 
saying: 

‘There’s a regular blaze of light begun not far away - 
hundreds of torches and many fires must have been lit 
suddenly and by magic. And hark to the singing and the 
harps! ’ 

After lying and listening for a while, they found they 
could not resist the desire to go nearer and try once more 
to get help. Up they got again; and this time the result 
was disastrous. The feast that they now saw was greater 
and more magnificent than before; and at the head of a 
long line of feasters sat a woodland king with a crown of 
leaves upon his golden hair, very much as Bombur had 
described the figure in his dream. The elvish folk were 
passing bowls from hand to hand and across the fires, and 
some were harping and many were singing. Their gleam¬ 
ing hair was twined with flowers; green and white gems 
glinted on their collars and their belts; and their faces 

14 « 



FLIES AND SPIDERS 

and their songs were filled witli mirth. Loud and clear 
and fair were those songs, and nut stepped Thorin into 
their midst. 

Dead silence fell in the middle of a word. Out went all 
light. The fires leaped up in Mack smokes. Ashes and 
cinders were in the eyes of the dv arves, and the wood was 
filled again with their clamour ind their cries. 

Bilbo found himself running round and round (as he 
thought) and calling and calling: ‘Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, 
Gloin, Fili, Kili, Bombur, Bifur, Bofur, Dwalin, Balin, 
Thorin Oakenshield,' while people he could not see or 
feel were doing the same all round him (with an occa¬ 
sional ‘Bilbo! ’ thrown in). But the cries of the others got 
steadily further and fainter, and though after a while it 
seemed to him they changed to yells and cries for help in 
the far distance, all noise at last died right away, and he 
was left alone in complete silence and darkness. 

That was one of his most miserable moments. But he 
soon made up his mind that it was no good trying to do 
anything till day came with some little light, and quite 
useless to go blundering about tiring himself out with no 
hope of any breakfast to revive him. So he sat himself 
down with his back to a tree, and not for the last time fell 
to thinking of his far-distant hobbit-hole with its beauti¬ 
ful pantries. He was deep in thoughts of bacon and eggs 
and toast and butter when he felt something touch him. 
Something like a strong sticky string was against his left 
hand, and when he tried to move he found that his legs 
were already wrapped in the same stuff, so that when he 
got up he fell over. 

Then the great spider, who had been busy tying him up 
while he dozed, came from behind him and came at him. 
He could only see the thing's eyes, but he could feel its 
hairy legs as it struggled to wind its abominable threads 
round and round him. It was lucky that he had come to 
his senses in time. Soon he would not have been able to 

143 



THE HOBBIT 


move at all. As it was, he had a desperate fight before he 
got free. He beat the creature off with his hands - it was 
trying to poison him to keep him quiet, as small spiders 
do to flies - until he remembered his sword and drew it 
out. Then the spider jumped back, and he had time to 
cut his legs loose. After that it was his turn to attack. The 
spider evidently was not used to things that carried such 
stings at their sides, or it would have hurried away 
quicker. Bilbo came at it before it could disappear and 
struck it with his sword right in the eyes. Then it went 
mad and leaped and danced and flung out its legs in 
horrible jerks, until he killed it with another stroke; and 
then he fell down and remembered nothing more for a 
long while. 

There was the usual dim grey light of the forest-day 
about him when he came to his senses. The spider lay 
dead beside him, and his sword-blade was stained black. 
Somehow the killing of the giant spider, all alone by him¬ 
self in the dark without the help of the wizard or the 
dwarves or of anyone else, made a great difference to Mr. 
Baggins. He felt a different person, and much fiercer and 
bolder in spite of an empty stomach, as he wiped his 
sword on the grass and put it back into its sheath. 

'1 will give you a name,’ he said to it, ’and I shall call 
you Sting.* 

After that he set out to explore. The forest was grim 
and silent, but obviously he had first of all to look for his 
friends, who were not likely to be very far off, unless they 
had been made prisoners by the elves (or worse things). 
Bilbo felt that it was unsafe to shout, and he stood a long 
while wondering in what direction the path lay, and in 
what direction he should go first to look for the dwarves. 

‘O! why did we not remember Beorn’s advice, and 
Gandalfsl’ he lamented. ‘What a mess we are in now! 
We! I only wish it was we: it is horrible being all 
alone.’ 

In the end be made as good a guess as he could at the 

144 



FLIES AND SPIDERS 

direction from which the cries for help had come in the 
night - and by luck (he was boi n with a good share of it) 
he guessed more or less right, as you will see. Having 
made up his mind he crept along as cleverly as he could. 
Hobbits are clever at quietness especially in woods, as I 
have already told you; also Bilbo had slipped on his ring 
before he started. That is why the spiders neither saw nor 
heard him coming. 

He had picked his way stealthily for some distance, 
when he noticed a place of dense black shadow ahead of 
him, black even for that forest, like a patch of midnight 
that had never been cleared away. As he drew nearer, he 
saw that it was made by spider-webs one behind and over 
and tangled with another. Suddenly he saw, too, that 
there were spiders huge and horrible sitting in the 
branches above him, and ring or no ring he trembled 
with fear lest they should discover him. Standing behind 
a tree he watched a group of them for some time, and 
then in the silence and stillness of the wood he realised 
that these loathsome creatures were speaking one to 
another. Their voices were a sort of thin creaking and 
hissing, but he could make out many of the words that 
they said. They were talking about the dwarves! 

‘It was a sharp struggle, but worth it,‘ said one. ‘What 
nasty thick skins they have to be sure, but I’ll wager there 
is good juice inside.’ 

‘Aye, they’ll make fine eating, when they've hung a bit,* 
said another. 

‘Don’t hang ’em too long,’ said a third. ‘They’re not as 
lat as they might be. Been feeding none too well of late, I 
should guess.’ 

‘Kill ’em, I say,’ hissed a fourth; ‘kill ’em now and hang 
’em dead for a while.’ 

‘They’re dead now. I’ll warrant,’ said the first. 

‘That they are not. I saw one a-struggling just now. 
Just coming round again, I should say, after a bee-eauti* 
ful sleep. I’ll show you.’ 


H5 



THE HOBBIT 


With that one of the fat spiders ran along a rope till it 
came to a dozen bundles hanging in a row from a high 
branch. Bilbo was horrified, now that he noticed them for 
the first time dangling in the shadows, to see a dwarvish 
foot sticking out of the bottoms of some of the bundles, or 
here and there the tip of a nose, or a bit of beard or of a 
hood. 

To the fattest of these bundles the spider went - ‘It is 
poor old Bombur, I’ll bet,* thought Bilbo - and nipped 
hard at the nose that stuck out. There was a muffled yelp 
inside, and a toe shot up and kicked the spider straight 
and hard. There was life in Bombur still. There was a 
noise like the kicking of a flabby football, and the en¬ 
raged spider fell off the branch, only catching itself with 
its own thread just in time. 

The others laughed. ‘You were quite right,’ they said, 
‘the meat’s alive and kicking!’ 

‘I’ll soon put an end to that,’ hissed the angry spider 
climbing back on to the branch. 

Bilbo saw that the moment had come when he must do 
something. He could not get up at the brutes and he had 
nothing to shoot with; but looking about he saw that in 
this place there were many stones lying in what appeared 
to be a now dry little watercourse. Bilbo was a pretty fair 
shot with a stone, and it did not take him long to find a 
nice smooth egg-shaped one that fitted his hand cosily. As 
a boy he used to practise throwing stones at things, until 
rabbits and squirrels, and even birds, got out of his way 
as quick as lightning if they saw him stoop; and even 
grown-up he had still spent a deal of his time at quoits, 
dart-throwing, shooting at the wand, bowls, ninepins and 
other quiet games of the aiming and throwing sort - in¬ 
deed he could do lots of things, besides blowing smoke- 
rings, asking riddles and cooking, that I haven’t had time 
to tell you about. There is no time now. While he was 
picking up stones, the spider had reached Bombur, and 

146 



FLIES AND SPIDERS 

soon he would have been dead. At that moment Bilbo 
threw. The stone struck the sjdder plunk on the head, 
and it dropped senseless off the tree, flop to the ground, 
with all its legs curled up. 

The next stone went whiz/ing through a big web, 
snapping its cords, and taking the spider sitting in the 
middle of it, whack, dead. Aftei that there was a deal of 
commotion in the spider-colotiy, and they forgot the 
dwarves for a bit, I can tell vou. They could not see 
Bilbo, but they could make a gt)od guess at the direction 
from which the stones were coming. As quick as lightning 
they came running and swinging towards the hobbit, 
flinging out their long threads in all directions, till the 
air seemed full of waving snares. 

Bilbo, however, soon slipped away to a different place. 
The idea came to him to lead the furious spiders further 
and further away from the dwarves, if he could; to make 
them curious, excited and angry all at once. When about 
fifty had gone off to the place where he had stood before, 
he threw some more stones at these, and at others that 
had stopped behind; then dancing among the trees he 
began to sing a song to infuriate them and bring them 
all after him, and also to let the dwarves hear his 
voice. 

This is what he sang: 

Old fat spider spinning in a tree! 

Old fat spider can't see me! 

Attercop! Attercop! 

Won't you stop, 

Stop your spinning and look for me? 

Old Tomnoddy, all big body. 

Old Tomnoddy can't spy me! 

Attercop! Attercop! 

Down you drop! 

You'll never catch me up your tree! 

»47 



THE HOBBIT 


Not very good perhaps, but then you must remember 
that he had to make it up himself, on the spur of a very 
awkward moment. It did what he wanted any way. As he 
sang he threw some more stones and stamped. Practically 
all the spiders in the place came after him: some 
dropped to the ground, others raced along the branches, 
swung from tree to tree, or cast new ropes across the dark 
spaces. They made for his noise far quicker than he 
had expected. They were frightfully angry. Quite apart 
from the stones no spider has ever liked being called 
Attercop, and Tomnoddy of course is insulting to 
anybody. 

OfF Bilbo scuttled to a fresh place, but several of the 
spiders had run now to different points in the glade 
where they lived, and were busy spinning webs across all 
the spaces between the tree-stems. Very soon the hobbit 
would be caught in a thick fence of them all round him - 
that at least was the spiders* idea. Standing now in the 
middle of the hunting and spinning insects Bilbo 
plucked up his courage and began a new song: 

Lazy Lob and crazy Cob 
are weaving webs to wind me. 

I am far more sweet than other meat, 
but still they cannot find me! 

Here am /, naughty little fly; 
you are fat and lazy. 

You cannot trap me, though you try, 
in your cobwebs crazy. 

With that he turned and found that the last space be¬ 
tween two tall trees had been closed with a web - but 
luckily not a proper web, only great strands of double¬ 
thick spider-rope run hastily backwards and forwards 
from trunk to trunk. Out came his little sword. He 
slashed the threads to pieces and went off singing. 

148 



FLIES AND SPIDERS 

The spiders saw the sword, though I don't suppose they 
knew what it was, and at once th< whole lot of them came 
hurrying after the hobbit along the ground and the 
branches, hairy legs waving, nippers and spinners anap< 
ping, eyes popping, full of froih and rage. They fol¬ 
lowed him into the forest umil Bilbo had gone 
far as he dared. Then quieter chan a mouse he stole 
back. 

He had precious little time, he knew, before the spiders 
were disgusted and came back to their trees where the 
dwarves were hung. In the meanwhile he had to rescue 
them. The worst part of the job was getting up on to the 
long branch where the bundles were dangling. I don’t 
suppose he would have managed it, if a spider had not 
luckily left a rope hanging down; with its help, though it 
stuck to his hand and hurt him, he scrambled up - only 
to meet an old slow wicked fat-bodied spider who had 
remained behind to guard the prisoners, and had been 
busy pinching them to see which was the juiciest to eat. It 
had thought of starting the feast while the others were 
away, but Mr. Baggins was in a hurry, and before the 
spider knew what was happening it felt his sting and 
rolled off the branch dead. 

Bilbo's next job was to loose a dwarf. What was he to 
do? If he cut the string which hung him up, the wretched 
dwarf would tumble thump to the ground a good way 
below. Wriggling along the branch (which made all the 
poor dwarves dance and dangle like ripe fruit) he 
reached the first bundle. 

Tili or Kili,’ he thought by the tip of a blue hood stick¬ 
ing out at the top. ‘Most likely Fili,' he thought by the tip 
of a long nose poking out of the winding threads. He 
managed by leaning over to cut most of the strong sticky 
threads that bound him round, and then, sure enough, 
with a kick and a struggle most of Fili emerged. I am 
afraid Bilbo actually laughed at the sight of him jerking 
his stiff arms and legs as he danced on the spider-string 

H9 



THE HOBBIT 


under his armpits, just like one of those funny toys bob¬ 
bing on a wire. 

Somehow or other Fili was got on to the branch, and 
then he did his best to help the hobbit, although he was 
feeling very sick and ill from spider-poison, and from 
hanging most of the night and the next day wound round 
and round with only his nose to breathe through. It took 
him ages to get the beastly stuff out of his eyes and eye¬ 
brows, and as for his beard, he had to cut most of it off. 
Well, between them they started to haul up first one 
dwarf and then another and slash them free. None of 
them were better off than Fili, and some of them were 
worse. Some had hardly been able to breathe at all (long 
noses are sometimes useful you see), and some had been 
more poisoned. 

In this way they rescued Kili, Bifur, Bofur, Dori and 
Nori. Poor old Bombur was so exhausted. He was the 
fattest and had been constantly pinched and poked - 
that he just rolled off the branch and fell plop on to the 
ground, fortunately on to leaves, and lay there. But there 
were still five dwarves hanging at the end of the branch 
when the spiders began to come back, more full of rage 
than ever. 

Bilbo immediately went to the end of the branch 
nearest the tree-trunk and kept back those that crawled 
up. He had taken off his ring when he rescued Fili and 
forgotten to put it on again, so now they all began to 
splutter and hiss: 

‘Now we see you, you nasty little creature! We will eat 
you and leave your bones and skin hanging on a tree. 
Ugh! He’s got a sting has he? Well, we’ll get him all the 
same, and then we’ll hang him head downwards for a day 
or two.’ 

While this was going on, the other dwarves were work¬ 
ing at the rest of the captives, and cutting at the threads 
with their knives. Soon all would be free, though it was 
not clear what would happen after that. The spiders had 

150 



FLIES AND SPIDERS 

caught them pretty easily the night before, but that had 
been unawares and in the dark This time there looked 
like being a horrible battle. 

Suddenly Bilbo noticed that some of the spiders had 
gathered round old Bombur on the floor, and had tied 
him up again and were dragging him away. He gave a 
shout and slashed at the spideis in front of him. They 
quickly gave way, and he scrambled and fell down the 
tree right into the middle of tliose on the ground. His 
little sword was something new in the way of stings for 
them. How it darted to and fro! It shone with delight as 
he stabbed at them. Half a dozen were killed before the 
rest drew off and left Bombur to Bilbo. 

‘Come down! Come down 1 ’ he shouted to the dwarves 
on the branch. ‘Don’t stay up there and be netted!’ For 
he saw spiders swarming up all the neighbouring trees, 
and crawling along the boughs above the heads of the 
dwarves. 

Down the dwarves scrambled or jumped or dropped, 
eleven all in a heap, most of them very shaky and little 
use on their legs. There they were at last, twelve of them, 
counting poor old Bombur, who was being propped up 
on either side by his cousin Bifur, and his brother Bofur; 
and Bilbo was dancing about and waving his sting; and 
hundreds of angry spiders were goggling at them all 
round and about and above. It looked pretty hopeless. 

Then the battle began. Some of the dwarves had 
knives, and some had sticks, and all of them could get at 
stones; and Bilbo had his elvish dagger. Again and again 
die spiders were beaten off, and many of them were 
killed. But it could not go on for long. Bilbo was nearly 
tired out; only four of the dwarves were able to 
stand firmly, and soon they would all be overpowered 
like weary flies. Already the spiders were beginning 
to weave their webs all round them again from tree to 
tree. 

In the end Bilbo could think of no plan except to let 



THE HOBBIT 


the dwarves into the secret of his ring. He was rather 
sorry about it, but it could not be helped. 

‘I am going to disappear,* he said. shall draw the 
spiders off, if I can; and you must keep together and 
make in the opposite direction. To the left there, that is 
more or less the way towards the place where we last saw 
the elf-fires.’ 

It was difficult to get them to understand, what with 
their dizzy heads, and the shouts, and the whacking of 
sticks and the throwing of stones; but at last Bilbo felt he 
could delay no longer - the spiders were drawing their 
circle ever closer. He suddenly slipped on his ring, and to 
the great astonishment of the dwarves he vanished. 

Soon there came the sound of ‘Lazy Lob’ and ‘Attercop’ 
from among the trees away on the right. That upset the 
spiders greatly. They stopped advancing, and some went 
off in the direction of the voice. ‘Attercop’ made them so 
angry that they lost their wits. Then Balin, who had 
grasped Bilbo’s plan better than the rest, led an attack. 
The dwarves huddled together in a knot, and sending a 
shower of stones they drove at the spiders on the left, and 
burst through the ring. Away behind them now the 
shouting and singing suddenly stopped. 

Hoping desperately that Bilbo had not been caught 
the dwarves went on. Not fast enough, though. They 
were sick and weary, and they could not go much better 
than a hobble and a wobble, though many of the spiders 
were close behind. Every now and then they had to turn 
and fight the creatures that were overtaking them; and 
already some spiders were in the trees above them and 
throwing down their long clinging threads. 

Things were looking pretty bad again, when suddenly 
Bilbo reappeared, and charged into the astonished 
spiders unexpectedly from the side. 

‘Go on 1 Go on 1 ’ he shouted. ‘I will do the stinging! ’ 

And he did. He darted backwards and forwards, slash¬ 
ing at spider-threads, hacking at their legs, and stabbing 



FLIES AND SPIDERS 

their fat bodies if they came too ntiar. The spiders swelled 
with rage, and spluttered and frothed, and hissed out 
Iiorrible curses; but they had become mortally afraid of 
Sting, and dared not come very near, now that it had 
come back. So curse as they would, their prey moved 
slowly but steadily away. It was i most terrible business, 
and seemed to take hours. But «t last, just when Bilbo 
felt that he could not lift his h ind for a single stroke 
more, the spiders suddenly gave it up, and followed them 
no more, but went back disappointed to their dark 
colony. 

The dwarves then noticed that they had come to the 
edge of a ring where elf-fires had been. Whether it was 
one of those they had seen the night before, they could 
not tell. But it seemed that some good magic lingered in 
such spots, which the spiders did not like. At any rate 
here the light was greener, and the boughs less thick and 
threatening, and they had a chance to rest and draw 
breath. 

There they lay for some time, puffing and panting. But 
very soon they began to ask questions. They had to have 
the whole vanishing business carefully explained, and the 
finding of the ring interested them so much that for a 
while they forgot their own troubles. Balin in particular 
insisted on having the Gollum story, riddles and all, told 
all over again, with the ring in its proper place. But after 
a time the light began to fail, and then other questions 
were asked. Where were they, and where was their path, 
and where was there any food, and what were they going 
to do next? These questions they asked over and over 
again, and it was from little Bilbo that they seemed to 
expect to get the answers. From which you can see that 
they had changed their opinion of Mr. Baggins very 
tnuch, and had begun to have a great respect for him (as 
Gandalf had said they would). Indeed they really ex¬ 
pected him to think of some wonderful plan for helping 
them, and were not merely grumbling. They knew only 



THE HOBBIT 


too well that they would soon all have been dead, if it 
had not been for the hobbit; and they thanked him many 
times. Some of them even got up and bowed right to the 
ground before him, though they fell over with the effort, 
and could not get on their legs again for some time. 
Knowing the truth about the vanishing did not lessen 
their opinion of Bilbo at all; for they saw that he had 
some wits, as well as luck and a magic ring - and all three 
were useful possessions. In fact they praised him so much 
that Bilbo began to feel there really was something of a 
bold adventurer about himself after all, though he would 
have felt a lot bolder still, if there had been anything to 
eat. 

But there was nothing, nothing at all; and none of 
them were fit to go and look for anything, or to search for 
the lost path. The lost path! No other idea would come 
into Bilbo’s tired head. He just sat staring in front of him 
at the endless trees; and after a while they all fell silent 
again. All except Balin. Long after the others had 
stopped talking and shut their eyes, he kept on muttering 
and chuckling to himself: 

‘Gollum! Well I’m blest! So that’s how he sneaked 
past me, is it? Now I know! Just crept quietly along did 
you, Mr. Baggins? Buttons all over the doorstep! Good 
old Bilbo - Bilbo - Bilbo - bo - bo - bo ’ And then he 
fell asleep, and there was complete silence for a long 
while. 

All of a sudden Dwalin opened an eye, and looked 
round at them. ‘Where is Thorin?* he asked. 

It was a terrible shock. Of course there were only 
thirteen of them, twelve dwarves and the hobbit. Where 
indeed was Thorin? They wondered what evil fate had 
befallen him, magic or dark monsters; and shuddered as 
they lay lost in the forest. There they dropped off one by 
one into uncomfortable sleep full of horrible dreams, as 
evening wore to black night; and there we must leave 

m 



FLIES AND SPIDERS 

them for the present, too sick and weary to set guards or 
to take turns at watching. 

Thorin had been caught much faster than they had. 
You remember Bilbo falling likf a log into sleep, as he 
stepped into a circle of light? The next time it had been 
Thorin who stepped forward, ard as the lights went out 
he fell like a stone enchanted All the noise of the 
dwarves lost in the night, their ci ies as the spiders caught 
them and bound them, and all the sounds of the battle 
next day, had passed over him unheard. Then the Wood- 
elves had come to him, and bound him, and carried him 
away. 

The feasting people were Wood-elves, of course. 
These are not wicked folk. If they have a fault it is dis¬ 
trust of strangers. Though their magic was strong, even in 
those days they were wary. They differed from the High 
Elves of the West, and were more dangerous and less 
wise. For most of them (together with their scattered 
relations in the hills and mountains) were descended 
from the ancient tribes that never went to Faerie in the 
West. There the Light-elves and the Deep-elves and the 
Sea-elves went and lived for ages, and grew fairer and 
wiser and more learned, and invented their magic and 
their cunning craft in the making of beautiful and 
marvellous things, before some came back into the Wide 
World. In the Wide World the Wood-elves lingered in 
the twilight of our Sun and Moon, but loved best the 
stars; and they wandered in the great forests that grew 
tall in lands that are now lost. They dwelt most often by 
the edges of the woods, from which they could escape at 
times to hunt, or to ride and run over the open lands by 
moonlight or starlight; and after the coming of Men they 
took ever more and more to the gloaming and the dusk. 
Still elves they were and remain, and that is Good 
People. 

In a great cave some miles within the edge of Mirk- 
wood on its eastern side there lived at this time their 

155 



THE HOBBIT 


greatest king. Before his huge doors of stone a river ran 
out of the heights of the forest and flowed on and out 
into the marshes at the feet of the high wooded lands. 
This great cave, from which countless smaller ones 
opened out on every side, wound far underground and 
had many passages and wide halls; but it was lighter and 
more wholesome than any goblin-dwelling, and neither 
so deep nor so dangerous. In fact the subjects of the king 
mostly lived and hunted in the open woods, and had 
houses or huts on the ground and in the branches. The 
beeches were their favourite trees. The king’s cave was his 
palace, and the strong place of his treasure, and the 
fortress of his people against their enemies. 

It was also the dungeon of his prisoners. So to the cave 
they dragged Thorin ~ not too gently, for they did not 
love dwarves, and thought he was an enemy. In ancient 
days they had had wars with some of the dwarves, whom 
they accused of stealing their treasure. It is only fair to 
say that the dwarves gave a different account, and said 
that they only took what was their due, for the elf-king 
had bargained with them to shape his raw gold and 
silver, and had afterwards refused to give them their pay. 
If the elf-king had a weakness it was for treasure, especi¬ 
ally for silver and white gems; and though his hoard was 
rich, he was ever eager for more, since he had not yet as 
great a treasure as other elf-lords of old. His people 
neither mined nor worked metals or jewels, nor did they 
bother much with trade or with tilling the earth. All this 
was well known to every dwarf, though Thorin’s family 
had had nothing to do with the old quarrel I have spoken 
of. Consequently Thorin was angry at their treatment of 
him, when they took their spell off him and he came to 
his senses; and also he was determined that no word of 
gold or jewels should be dragged out of him. 

The king looked sternly on Thorin, when he was 
brought before him, and asked him many questions. But 
Thorin would only say that he was starving. 

156 



FLIES AND SPIDERS 

‘Why did you and your folk thrt*e times try to attack my 
people at their merrymaking?' asked the king. 

‘We did not attack them/ ansv^ered Thorin; ‘we came 
to beg, because we were starving ’ 

‘Where are your friends now, and what are they 
doing?' 

‘I don't know, but I expect stiirving in the forest.' 

‘What were you doing in the forest?' 

‘Looking for food and drink, because we were starving.' 

‘But what brought you into the forest at all?' asked the 
king angrily. 

At that Thorin shut his mouth and would not say 
another word. 

‘Very well!’ said the king. ‘Take him away and keep 
him safe, until he feels inclined to tell the truth, even if 
he waits a hundred years.' 

Then the elves put thongs on him, and shut him in one 
of the inmost caves with strong wooden doors, and left 
him. They gave him food and drink, plenty of both, if 
not very fine; for Wood-elves were not goblins, and were 
reasonably well-behaved even to their worst enemies, 
when they captured them. The giant spiders were the 
only living things that they had no mercy upon. 

There in the king’s dungeon poor Thorin lay: and 
after he had got over his thankfulness for bread and 
meat and water, he began to wonder what had become of 
his unfortunate friends. It was not very long before he 
discovered; but that belongs to the next chapter and the 
beginning of another adventure in which the hobbit 
again showed his usefulness. 


157 



9 Barrels out of bond 

The day after the battle with the spiders, Bilbo and the 
dwarves made one last despairing effort to find a way out 
before they died of hunger and thirst. They got up and 
staggered on in the direction which eight out of the 
thirteen of them guessed to be the one in which the path 
lay; but they never found out if they were right. Such day 
as there ever was in the forest was fading once more into 
the blackness of night, when suddenly out sprang the 
light of many torches all round them, like hundreds of 
red stars. Out leaped Wood-elves with their bows and 
spears and called the dwarves to halt. 

There was no thought of a fight. Even if the dwarves 
had not been in such a state that they were actually glad 
to be captured, their small knives, the only weapons they 
had, would have been of no use against the arrows of the 
elves that could hit a bird's eye in the dark. So they 
simply stopped dead and sat down and waited - all 
except Bilbo, who popped on his ring and slipped 
quickly to one side. That is why, when the elves bound 
the dwarves in a long line, one behind the other, and 
counted them, they never found or counted the 
hobbit. 

Nor did they hear or feel him trotting along well be¬ 
hind their torch-light as they led off their prisoners into 
the forest. Each dwarf was blindfold, but that did not 
make much difference, for even Bilbo with the use of his 
eyes could not see where they were going, and neither he 
nor the others knew where they had started from anyway. 
Bilbo had all he could do to keep up with the torches, for 
the elves were making the dwarves go as fast as ever they 
could, sick and weary as they were. The king had ordered 
them to make haste. Suddenly the torches stopped, and 

158 



BARRELS OUT OF BOND 

the hobbit had just time to catch them up before they 
began to cross the bridge. This was the bridge that led 
across the river to the king’s doors The water flowed dark 
and swift and strong beneath; and at the far end were 
gates before the mouth of a huge cave that ran into the 
side of a steep slope covered with trees. There the great 
beeches came right down to the l ank, till their feet were 
in the stream. 

Across this bridge the elves thiust their prisoners, but 
Bilbo hesitated in the rear. He did not at all like the look 
of the cavern-mouth, and he onh made up his mind not 
to desert his friends just in time to scuttle over at the 
heels of the last elves, before the great gates of the king 
closed behind them with a clang. 

Inside the passages were lit with red torch-light, and 
the elf-guards sang as they marched along the twisting, 
crossing, and echoing paths. These were not like those of 
the goblin-cities: they were smaller, less deep under¬ 
ground, and filled with a cleaner air. In a great hall with 
pillars hewn out of the living stone sat the Elvenking on 
a chair of carven wood. On his head was a crown of 
berries and red leaves, for the autumn was come again. In 
the spring he wore a crown of woodland flowers. In his 
hand he held a carven staff of oak. 

The prisoners were brought before him; and though he 
looked grimly at them, he told his men to unbind them, 
for they were ragged and weary. ‘Besides they need no 
ropes in here,’ said he. ‘There is no escape from my magic 
doors for those who are once brought inside.’ 

Long and searchingly he questioned the dwarves about 
their doings, and where they were going to, and where 
they were coming from; but he got little more news out of 
them than out of Thorin. They were surly and angry and 
did not even pretend to be polite. 

‘What have we done, O king?’ said Balin, who was the 
eldest left. ‘Is it a crime to be lost in the forest, to be 
hungry and thirsty, to be trapped by spiders? Are the 



THE HOBBIT 


spiders your tame beasts or your pets, if killing them 
makes you angry?* 

Such a question of course made the king angrier than 
ever, and he answered: ‘It is a crime to wander in my 
realm without leave. Do you forget that you were in my 
kingdom, using the road that my people made? Did you 
not three times pursue and trouble my people in the 
forest and rouse the spiders with your riot and clamour? 
After all the disturbance you have made I have a right to 
know what brings you here, and if you will not tell me 
now, I will keep you all in prison until you have learned 
sense and manners!* 

Then he ordered the dwarves each to be put in a 
separate cell and to be given food and drink, but not to 
be allowed to pass the doors of their little prisons, until 
one at least of them was willing to tell him all he wanted 
to know. But he did not tell them that Thorin was also a 
prisoner with him. It was Bilbo who found that out. 

Poor Mr. Baggins - it was a weary long time that he 
lived in that place all alone, and always in hiding, never 
daring to take off his ring, hardly daring to sleep, even 
tucked away in the darkest and remotest corners he could 
find. For something to do he took to wandering about the 
Elvenking’s palace. Magic doors shut the gates, but he 
could sometimes get out, if he was quick. Companies of 
the Wood-elves, sometimes with the king at their head, 
would from time to time ride out to hunt, or to other 
business in the woods and in the lands to the East. Then 
if Bilbo was very nimble, he could slip out just behind 
them; though it was a dangerous thing to do. More than 
once he was nearly caught in the doors, as they clashed 
together when the last elf passed; yet he did not dare to 
march among them because of his shadow (altogether 
thin and wobbly as it was in torchlight), or for fear of 
being bumped into and discovered. And when he did go 
out, which was not very often, he did no good. He did not 

160 



BARRELS OUT OF BOND 

wish to desert the dwarves, and indeed he did not know 
where in the world to go without them. He could not 
keep up with the hunting elves all the time they were 
out, so he never discovered the w.iys out of the wood, and 
was left to wander miserably in the forest, terrified of 
losing himself, until a chance came of returning. He was 
hungry too outside, for he was no hunter; but inside the 
caves he could pick up a living of some sort by stealing 
food from store or table when no one was at hand. 

‘I am like a burglar that can’t get away, but must go on 
miserably burgling the same house day after day,’ he 
thought. ‘This is the dreariest and dullest part of all this 
wretched, tiresome, uncomfortable adventure! I wish I 
was back in my hobbit-hole by my own warm fireside 
with the lamp shining!* He often wished, too, that he 
could get a message for help sent to the wizard, but that 
of course was quite impossible; and he soon realized that 
if anything was to be done, it would have to be done by 
Mr. Baggins, alone and unaided. 

Eventually, after a week or two of this sneaking sort of 
life, by watching and following the guards and taking 
what chances he could, he managed to find out where 
each dwarf was kept. He found all their twelve cells in 
different parts of the palace, and after a time he got to 
know his way about very well. What was his surprise one 
day to overhear some of the guards talking and to learn 
that there was another dwarf in prison too, in a specially 
deep dark place. He guessed at once, of course, that that 
was Thorin; and after a while he found that his guess was 
right. At last after many difficulties he managed to find 
the place when no one was about, and to have a word 
with the chief of the dwarves. 

Thorin was too wretched to be angry any longer at his 
misfortunes, and was even beginning to think of telling 
the king all about his treasure and his quest (which shows 
how low-spirited he had become), when he heard Bilbo’s 
little voice at his keyhole. He could hardly believe his 

i6i 



THE HOBBIT 


ears. Soon however he made up his mind that he could 
not be mistaken, and he came to the door and had a long 
whispered talk with the hobbit on the other side. 

So it was that Bilbo was able to take secretly Thorin’s 
message to each of the other imprisoned dwarves, telling 
them that Thorin their chief was also in prison close at 
hand, and that no one was to reveal their errand to the 
king, not yet, nor before Thorin gave the word. For 
Thorin had taken heart again hearing how the hobbit 
had rescued his companions from the spiders, and was 
determined once more not to ransom himself with 
promises to the king of a share in the treasure, until all 
hope of escaping in any other way had disappeared; until 
in fact the remarkable Mr. Invisible Baggins (of whom 
he began to have a very high opinion indeed) had alto¬ 
gether failed to think of something clever. 

The other dwarves quite agreed when they got the 
message. They all thought their own shares in the 
treasure (which they quite regarded as theirs, in spite of 
their plight and the still unconquered dragon) would 
suffer seriously if the Wood-elves claimed part of it, and 
they all trusted Bilbo. Just what Gandalf had said would 
happen, you see. Perhaps that was part of his reason for 
going off and leaving them. 

Bilbo, however, did not feel nearly so hopeful as they 
did. He did not like being depended on by everyone, and 
he wished he had the wizard at hand. But that was no 
use: probably all the dark distance of Mirkwood lay be¬ 
tween them. He sat and thought and thought, until his 
head nearly burst, but no bright idea would come. One 
invisible ring was a very fine thing, but it was not much 
good among fourteen. But of course, as you have guessed, 
he did rescue his friends in the end, and this is how it 
happened. 

One day, nosing and wandering about. Bilbo dis¬ 
covered a very interesting thing: the great gates were not 
the only entrance to the caves. A stream flowed under 

162 



BARRELS OUT OF BOND 

part of the lowest regions of the* palace, and joined the 
Forest River some way further to the east, beyond the 
steep slope out of which the main mouth opened. Where 
this underground watercourse came forth from the hill¬ 
side there was a Watergate. Tht re the rocky roof came 
down close to the surface of thr stream, and from it a 
portcullis could be dropped right to the bed of the river 
to prevent anyone coming in oi out that way. But the 
portcullis was often open, for a good deal of traffic went 
out and in by the water-gate. If anyone had come in that 
way, he would have found himself in a dark rough tunnel 
leading deep into the heart of the hill; but at one point 
where it passed under the caves the roof had been cut 
away and covered with great oaken trapdoors. These 
opened upwards into the king’s cellars. There stood 
barrels, and barrels, and barrels; for the Wood-elves, and 
especially their king, were very fond of wine, though no 
vines grew in those parts. The wine, and other goods, 
were brought from far away, from their kinsfolk in the 
South, or from the vineyards of Men in distant lands. 

Hiding behind one of the largest barrels Bilbo dis¬ 
covered the trapdoors and their use, and lurking there, 
listening to the talk of the king’s servants, he learned how 
the wine and other goods came up the rivers, or over 
land, to the Long Lake. It seemed a town of Men still 
throve there, built out on bridges far into the water as a 
protection against enemies of all sorts, and especially 
against the dragon of the Mountain. From Lake-town the 
barrels were brought up the Forest River. Often they 
were just tied together like big rafts and poled or rowed 
up the stream; sometimes they were loaded on to flat 
boats. 

When the barrels were empty the elves cast them 
through the trapdoors, opened the water-gate, and out 
the barrels floated on the stream, bobbing along, until 
they were carried by the current to a place far down the 
river where the bank jutted out, near to the very eastern 

163 



THE HOBBIT 


edge of Mirkwood. There they were collected and tied 
together and floated back to Lake-town, which stood close 
to the point where the Forest River flowed into the Long 
Lake. 

For some time Bilbo sat and thought about this water- 
gate, and wondered if it could be used for the escape of 
his friends, and at last he had the desperate beginnings of 
a plan. 

The evening meal had been taken to the prisoners. 
The guards were tramping away down the passages 
taking the torchlight with them and leaving everything 
in darkness. Then Bilbo heard the king’s butler bidding 
the chief of the guards good-night. 

‘Now come with me,* he said, ‘and taste the new wine 
that has just come in. I shall be hard at work tonight 
clearing the cellars of the empty wood, so let us have a 
drink first to help the labour.’ 

‘Very good,’ laughed the chief of the guards. ‘I’ll taste 
with you, and see if it is fit for the king’s table. There 
is a feast tonight and it would not do to send up poor 
stuff!* 

When he heard this Bilbo was all in a flutter, for he 
saw that luck was with him and he had a chance at once 
to try his desperate plan. He followed the two elves, until 
they entered a small cellar and sat down at a table on 
which two large flagons were set. Soon they began to 
drink and laugh merrily. Luck of an unusual kind was 
with Bilbo then. It must be potent wine to make a wood- 
elf drowsy; but this wine, it would seem, was the heady 
vintage of the great gardens of Dorwinion, not meant for 
his soldiers or his servants, but for the king’s feasts only, 
and for smaller bowls not for the butler’s great flagons. 

Very soon the chief guard nodded his head, then he 
laid it on the table and fell fast asleep. The butler went 
on talking and laughing to himself for a while without 

164 



BARRELS OUT OF BOND 

seeming to notice, but soon his head too nodded to the 
table, and he fell asleep and snored beside his friend. 
Then in crept the hobbit. Very .•^oon the chief guard had 
no keys, but Bilbo was trotting as fast as he could along 
the passages towards the cells. 1 he great bunch seemed 
very heavy to his arms, and his heart was often in his 
mouth, in spite of his ring, for he could not prevent the 
keys from making every now and then a loud clink and 
clank, which put him all in a tiemble. 

First he unlocked Balin's door, and locked it again 
carefully as soon as the dwarf was outside. Balin was most 
surprised, as you can imagine; but glad as he was to get 
out of his wearisome little stone room, he wanted to stop 
and ask questions, and know what Bilbo was going to do, 
and all about it. 

‘No time now! * said the hobbit. ‘You just follow me I 
We must all keep together and not risk getting separ¬ 
ated. All of us must escape or none, and this is our last 
chance. If this is found out, goodness knows where the 
king will put you next, with chains on your hands and 
feet too, I expect. Don’t argue, there’s a good fellow! * 

Then off he went from door to door, until his follow¬ 
ing had grown to twelve - none of them any too nimble, 
what with the dark, and what with their long imprison¬ 
ment. Bilbo’s heart thumped everytime one of them 
bumped into another, or grunted or whispered in the 
dark. ‘Drat this dwarvish racket! ’ he said to himself. But 
all went well, and they met no guards. As a matter of fact 
there was a great autumn feast in the woods that night, 
and in the halls above. Nearly all the king’s folk were 
merrymaking. 

At last after much blundering they came to Thorin’s 
dungeon, far down in a deep place and fortunately not 
far from the cellars. 

‘Upon my word!’ said Thorin, when Bilbo whispered 
to him to come out and join his friends, ‘Gandalf spoke 
true, as usual 1 A pretty fine burglar you make, it seems, 

165 



THE HOBBIT 


when the time comes. I am sure we are all for ever at your 
service, whatever happens after this. But what comes 
next?' 

Bilbo saw that the time had come to explain his idea, 
as far as he could; but he did not feel at all sure how the 
dwarves would take it. His fears were quite justified, for 
they did not like it a bit, and started grumbling loudly in 
spite of their danger. 

‘We shall be bruised and battered to pieces, and 
drowned too, for certain I * they muttered. ‘We thought 
you had got some sensible notion, when you managed to 
get hold of the keys. This is a mad idea! * 

‘Very well!' said Bilbo very downcast, and also rather 
annoyed. ‘Come along back to your nice cells, and I will 
lock you all in again, and you can sit there comfortably 
and think of a better plan - but I don't suppose I shall 
ever get hold of the keys again, even if I feel inclined to 
try.' 

That was too much for them, and they calmed down. 
In the end, of course, they had to do just what Bilbo 
suggested, because it was obviously impossible for them 
to try and find their way into the upper halls, or to fight 
their way out of gates that closed by magic; and it was no 
good grumbling in the passages until they were caught 
again. So following the hobbit, down into the lowest 
cellars they crept. They passed a door through which the 
chief guard and the butler could be seen still happily 
snoring with smiles upon their faces. The wine of Dor- 
winion brings deep and pleasant dreams. There would be 
a difiEerent expression on the face of the chief guard next 
day, even though Bilbo, before they went on, stole in and 
kindheartedly put the keys back on his belt. 

‘That will save him some of the trouble he is in for,' 
said Mr. Baggins to himself. ‘He wasn't a bad fellow, and 
quite decent to the prisoners. It will puzzle them all too. 
They will think we had a very strong magic to pass 
through all those locked doors and disappear. Disappear! 

166 



BARRELS OUT OF BOND 


We have got to get busy very quick, if that is to happen!' 

Balin was told off to watch the guard and the butler 
and give warning if they stirred The rest went into the 
adjoining cellar with the trapdo »rs. There was little time 
to lose. Before long, as Bilbo kne w, some elves were under 
orders to come down and help the butler get the empty 
barrels through the doors into t’le stream. These were in 
fact already standing in rows in the middle of the floor 
waiting to be pushed off. Some of them were wine-barrels, 
and these were not much use, as they could not easily be 
opened at the end without a deal of noise, nor could they 
easily be secured again. But among them were several 
others which had been used for bringing other stuffs, 
butter, apples, and all sorts of things, to the king’s 
palace. 

They soon found thirteen with room enough for a 
dwarf in each. In fact some were too roomy, and as they 
climbed in the dwarves thought anxiously of the shaking 
and the bumping they would get inside, though Bilbo 
did his best to find straw and other stuff to pack them in 
as cosily as could be managed in a short time. At last 
twelve dwarves were stowed. Thorin had given a lot of 
trouble, and turned and twisted in his tub and grumbled 
like a large dog in a small kennel; while Balin, who came 
last, made a great fuss about his air-holes and said he was 
stifling, even before his lid was on. Bilbo had done what 
he could to close holes in the sides of the barrels, and to 
fix on all the lids as safely as could be managed, and now 
he was left alone again, running round putting the 
finishing touches to the packing, and hoping against hope 
that his plan would come off. 

It had not been done a bit too soon. Only a minute or 
two after Balin’s lid had been fitted on there came the 
sound of voices and the flicker of lights. A number of 
elves came laughing and talking into the cellars and sing¬ 
ing snatches of song. They had left a merry feast in one of 

167 



THE HOBBIT 


the halls and were bent on returning as soon as they 
could. 

‘Where’s old Gallon, the butler?’ said one. ‘I haven’t 
seen him at the tables tonight. He ought to be here now 
to show us what is to be done.’ 

‘I shall be angry if the old slowcoach is late,’ said 
another. I have no wish to waste time down here while 
the song is up I ’ 

‘Ha, ha! ’ came a cry. ‘Here’s the old villain with his 
head on a jug! He’s been having a little feast all to him¬ 
self and his friend the captain.’ 

‘Shake him! Wake him!’ shouted the others im¬ 
patiently. 

Gallon was not at all pleased at being shaken or 
wakened, and still less at being laughed at. ‘You’re late,’ 
he grumbled. ‘Here am I waiting and waiting down here, 
while you fellows drink and make merry and forget your 
tasks. Small wonder if I fall asleep from weariness! ’ 

‘Small wonder,’ said they, ‘when the explanation stands 
close at hand in a jug! Come give us a taste of your 
sleeping-draught before we fall to! No need to wake the 
turnkey yonder. He has had his share by the looks of 
it.’ 

Then they drank once round and became mighty 
merry all of a sudden. But they did not quite lose their 
wits. ‘Save us, Gabon I ’ cried some, ‘you began your feast¬ 
ing early and muddled your wits! You have stacked some 
full casks here instead of the empty ones, if there is any¬ 
thing in weight.' 

‘Get on with the work!’ growled the butler. ‘There 
is nothing in the feeling of weight in an idle toss-pot’s 
arms. These are the ones to go and no others. Do as 
I say! ’ 

‘Very well, very well,' they answered rolling the barrels 
to the opening. ‘On your head be it, if the king’s full 
butter-tubs and his best wine are pushed into the river for 
the Lake-men to feast on for noting! ’ 

168 



BARRELS OUT OF BOND 

Roll - roll - roll - y'oll, 
rolUroil-rolling down the hole! 

Heave ho! Sfdash plump! 

Down they go, dow n they bump! 

So they sang as first one b irrel and then another 
rumbled to the dark opening and was pushed over into 
the cold water some feet below. Some were barrels really 
empty, some were tubs neatly p.icked with a dwarf each; 
but down they all went, one after another, with many a 
clash and a bump, thudding on top of ones below, 
smacking into the water, jostling against the walls of the 
tunnel, knocking into one another, and bobbing away 
down the current. 

It was just at this moment that Bilbo suddenly dis¬ 
covered the weak point in his plan. Most likely you saw it 
some time ago and have been laughing at him; but I 
don’t suppose you would have done half as well your¬ 
selves in his place. Of course he was not in a barrel him¬ 
self, nor was there anyone to pack him in, even if there 
had been a chance! It looked as if he would certainly lose 
his friends this time (nearly all of them had already dis¬ 
appeared through the dark trapdoor), and get utterly left 
behind and have to stay lurking as a permanent burglar 
in the elf-caves for ever. For even if he could have escaped 
through the upper gates at once, he had precious small 
chance of ever finding the dwarves again. He did not 
know the way by land to the place where the barrels were 
collected. He wondered what on earth would happen to 
them without him; for he had not had time to tell the 
dwarves all that he had learned, or what he had meant to 
do, once they were out of the wood. 

While all these thoughts were passing through his 
mind, the elves being very merry began to sing a song 
round the river-door. Some had already gone to haul on the 
ropes which pulled up the portcullis at the water-gate so as 
to let out the barrels as soon as they were all afloat below. 

169 



THE HOBBIT 


Down the swift dark stream you go 
Back to lands you once did know! 

Leave the halls and caverns deep, 

Leave the northern mountains steep. 

Where the forest wide and dim 
Stoops in shadow grey and grim! 

Float beyond the world of trees 
Out into the whispering breeze, 

Past the rushes, past the reeds. 

Past the marshes waving weeds. 

Through the mist that riseth white 
Up from mere and pool at night! 

Follow, follow stars that leap 
Up the heavens cold and steep; 

Turn when dawn comes over land. 

Over rapid, over sand, 

South away! and South away! 

Seek the sunlight and the day, 

Back to pasture, back to mead. 

Where the kine and oxen feed! 

Back to gardens on the hills 
Where the berry swells and fills 
Under sunlight, under day! 

South away! and South away! 

Down the swift dark stream you go 
Back to lands you once did know! 

Now the very last barrel was being rolled to the doors 1 
In despair and not knowing what else to do, poor little 
Bilbo caught hold of it and was pushed over the edge 
with it. Down into the water he fell, splash! into the cold 
dark water with the barrel on top of him. 

He came up again spluttering and clinging to the 
wood like a rat, but for all his efEorts he could not 
scramble on top. Every time he tried, the barrel rolled 
round and ducked him under again. It was really empty, 
and floated light as a cork. Though his ears were full of 

170 



BARRELS OUT OF BOND 

water, he could hear the elves still singing in the cellar 
above. Then suddenly the trapdoors fell to with a boom 
and their voices faded away. Hr was in the dark tunnel, 
floating in icy water, all alone - for you cannot count 
friends that are all packed up m barrels. 

Very soon a grey patch came m the darkness ahead. He 
heard the creak of the water-gnte being hauled up, and 
he found that he was in the midst of a bobbing and 
bumping mass of casks and tubs all pressing together to 
pass under the arch and get out into the open stream. He 
has as much as he could do to prevent himself from being 
hustled and battered to bits; but at last the jostling 
crowd began to break up and swing off, one by one, 
under the stony arch and away. Then he saw that it 
would have been no good even if he had managed to get 
astride his barrel, for there was no room to spare, not 
even for a hobbit, between its top and the suddenly 
stooping roof where the gate was. 

Out they went under the overhanging branches of the 
trees on either bank. Bilbo wondered what the dwarves 
were feeling and whether a lot of water was getting into 
their tubs. Some of those that bobbed along by him in the 
gloom seemed pretty low in the water, and he guessed 
that these had dwarves inside. 

‘I do hope I put the lids on tight enough 1 * he thought, 
but before long he was worrying too much about himself 
to remember the dwarves. He managed to keep his head 
above the water, but he was shivering with the cold, and 
he wondered if he would die of it before the luck turned, 
and how much longer he would be able to hang on, and 
whether he should risk the chance of letting go and try¬ 
ing to swim to the bank. 

The luck turned all right before long: the eddying 
current carried several barrels close ashore at one point 
and there for a while they stuck against some hidden 
root Then Bilbo took the opportunity of scrambling up 

171 



THE HOBBIT 


the side of his barrel while it was held steady against 
another. Up he crawled like a drowned rat, and lay on 
the top spread out to keep the balance as best he could. 
The breeze was cold but better than the water, and he 
hoped he would not suddenly roll off again when they 
started off once more. 

Before long the barrels broke free again and turned 
and twisted off down the stream, and out into the main 
current. Then he found it quite as difficult to stick on as 
he had feared; but he managed it somehow, though it 
was miserably uncomfortable. Luckily he was very light, 
and the barrel was a good big one and being rather leaky 
had now shipped a small amount of water. All the same it 
was like trying to ride, without bridle or stirrups, a round- 
bellied pony that was always thinking of rolling on the 
grass. 

In this way at last Mr. Baggins came to a place where 
the trees on either hand grew thinner. He could see the 
paler sky between them. The dark river opened suddenly 
wide, and there it was joined to the main water of the 
Forest River flowing down in haste from the king's great 
doors. There was a dim sheet of water no longer over¬ 
shadowed, and on its sliding surface there were dancing 
and broken reflections of clouds and of stars. Then the 
hurrying water of the Forest River swept all the company 
of casks and tubs away to the north bank, in which it had 
eaten out a wide bay. This had a shingly shore under 
hanging banks and was walled at the eastern end by a 
little jutting cape of hard rock. On the shallow shore 
most of the barrels ran aground, though a few went on to 
bump against the stony pier. 

There were people on the look-out on the banks. They 
quickly poled and pushed all the barrels together into 
the shallows, and when they had counted them they 
roped them together and left them till the morning. Poor 
dwarves I Bilbo was not so badly off now. He slipped 
from his barrel and waded ashore, and then sneaked 

i7« 



BARRELS OUT OF BOND 

along to some huts that he could see near the water's 
edge. He no longer thought twice about picking up a 
supper uninvited if he got the chance; he had been 
obliged to do it for so long, and he knew now only too 
well what it was to be really hungry, not merely politely 
interested in the dainties of a well-filled larder. Also he 
had caught a glimpse of a fire through the trees, and that 
appealed to him with his dripping and ragged clothes 
clinging to him cold and clammy. 

There is no need to tell you much of his adventures 
that night, for now we are drawing near the end of the 
eastward journey and coming to the last and greatest 
adventure, so we must hurry on. Of course helped by his 
magic ring he got on very well at first, but he was given 
away in the end by his wet footsteps and the trail of 
drippings that he left wherever he went or sat; and also 
he began to snivel, and wherever he tried to hide he was 
found out by the terrific explosions of his suppressed 
sneezes. Very soon there was a fine commotion in the 
village by the riverside; but Bilbo escaped into the woods 
carrying a loaf and a leather bottle of wine and pie that 
did not belong to him. The rest of the night he had to 
pass wet as he was and far from a fire, but the bottle 
helped him to do that, and he actually dozed a little on 
some dry leaves, even though the year was getting late 
and the air was chilly. 

He woke again with a specially loud sneeze. It was 
already grey morning, and there was a merry racket down 
by the river. They were making up a raft of barrels, and 
the raft-elves would soon be steering it off down the 
stream to Lake-town. Bilbo sneezed again. He was no 
longer dripping but he felt cold all over. He scrambled 
down as fast as his stiff legs would take him and 
managed just in time to get on to the mass of casks 
without being noticed in the general bustle. Luckily there 
was no sun at the time to cast an awkward shadow, and 



THE HOBBIT 


for a merqr he did not sneeze again for a good while. 

There was a mighty pushing of poles. The elves that 
were standing in the shallow water heaved and shoved. 
The barrels now all lashed together creaked and fretted. 

‘This is a heavy load I' some grumbled. ‘They float too 
deep - some of these are never empty. If they had come 
ashore in the daylight, we might have had a look inside,’ 
they said. 

‘No time nowl' cried the raftman. ‘Shove off!’ 

And off they went at last, slowly at first, until they had 
passed the point of rock where other elves stood to fend 
them off with poles, and then quicker and quicker as they 
caught the main stream and went sailing away down, 
down towards the Lake. 

They had escaped the dungeons of the king and were 
through the wood, but whether alive or dead still re¬ 
mains to be seen. 


10 A warm welcome 

The day grew lighter and warmer as they floated along. 
After a while the river rounded a steep shoulder of land 
that came down upon their left. Under its rocky feet like 
an inland cliff the deepest stream had flowed lapping and 
bubbling. Suddenly the cliff fell away. The shores sank. 
The trees ended. Then Bilbo saw a sight: 

The lands opened wide about him, filled with the 
waters of the river which broke up and wandered in a 
hundred winding courses, or halted in marshes and pools 
dotted with isles on every side; but still a strong water 
flowed on steadily through the midst. And far away, its 
dark head in a torn cloud, there loomed the Mountain! 
Its nearest neighbours to the North-East and the tumbled 

174 



A WARM WELCOME 

land that joined it to them could not be seen. All alone it 
rose and looked across the marshes to the forest. The 
Lonely Mountain! Bilbo had come far and through 
many adventures to see it, and now he did not like the 
look of it in the least. 

As he listened to the talk of the raftmen and pieced 
together the scraps of information they let fall, he soon 
realized that he was very fortunate ever to have seen it at 
all, even from this distance. Dreary as had been his im¬ 
prisonment and unpleasant as was his position (to say 
nothing of the poor dwarves underneath him) still, he 
had been more lucky than he had guessed. The talk was 
all of the trade that came and went on the waterways and 
the growth of the traffic on the river, as the roads out of 
the East towards Mirkwood vanished or fell into disuse; 
and of the bickerings of the Lake-men and the Wood- 
elves about the upkeep of the Forest River and the care 
of the banks. Those lands had changed much since the 
days when dwarves dwelt in the Mountain, days which 
most people now remembered only as a very shadowy 
tradition. They had changed even in recent years, and 
since the last news that Gandalf had had of them. Great 
floods and rains had swollen the waters that flowed east; 
and there had been an earthquake or two (which some 
were inclined to attribute to the dragon - alluding to 
him chiefly with a curse and an ominous nod in the 
direction of the Mountain). The marshes and bogs had 
spread wider and wider on either side. Paths had van¬ 
ished, and many a rider and wanderer too, if they had 
tried to find the lost ways across. The elf-road through 
the wood which the dwarves had followed on the advice 
of Beorn now came to a doubtful and little used end at 
the eastern edge of the forest; only the river offered any 
longer a safe way from the skirts of Mirkwood in the 
North to the mountain-shadowed plains beyond, and the 
river was guarded by the Wood-elves’ king. 

So you see Bilbo had come in the end by the only road 

m 



THE HOBBIT 

that was any good. It might have been some comfort to 
Mr. Baggins shivering on the barrels, if he had known 
that news of this had reached Gandalf far away and given 
him great anxiety, and that he was in fact finishing his 
other business (which does not come into this tale) and 
getting ready to come in search of Thorin's company. But 
Bilbo did not know it. 

All he knew was that the river seemed to go on and on 
and on for ever, and he was hungry, and had a nasty cold 
in the nose, and did not like the way the Mountain 
seemed to frown at him and threaten him as it drew ever 
nearer. After a while, however, the river took a more 
southerly course and the Mountain receded again, and at 
last, late in the day the shores grew rocky, the river 
gathered all its wandering waters together into a deep 
and rapid flood, and they swept along at great speed. 

The sun had set when, turning with another sweep 
towards the East, the forest-river rushed into the Long 
Lake. There it had a wide mouth with stony clifflike gates 
at either side whose feet were piled with shingles. The 
Long Lake! Bilbo had never imagined that any water 
that was not the sea could look so big. It was so wide that 
the opposite shores looked small and far, but it was so 
long that its northerly end, which pointed towards the 
Mountain, could not be seen at all. Only from the map 
did Bilbo know that away up there, where the stars of the 
Wain were already twinkling, the Running River came 
down into the lake from Dale and with the Forest River 
filled with deep waters what must once have been a great 
deep rocky valley. At the southern end the doubled 
waters poured out again over high waterfalls and ran 
away hurriedly to unknown lands. In the still evening air 
the noise of the falls could be heard like a distant roar. 

Not far from the mouth of the Forest River was the 
strange town he heard the elves speak of in the king’s 
cellars. It was not built on the shore, though there were a 
few huts and buildings there, but right out on the surface 

176 



A WARM WET.COME 

of the lake, protected from the ^wirl of the entering river 
by a promontory of rock which formed a calm bay. A 
great bridge made of wood rail out to where on huge 
piles made of forest trees was built a busy wooden town, 
not a town of elves but of Men who still dared to dwell 
here under the shadow of the listant dragon-mountain. 
They still throve on the trade that came up the great 
river from the South and was carted past the falls to their 
town; but in the great days ot old, when Dale in the 
North was rich and prosperous, they had been wealthy 
and powerful, and there had been fleets of boats on the 
waters, and some were filled with gold and some with 
warriors in armour, and there had been wars and deeds 
which were now only a legend. The rotting piles of a 
greater town could still be seen along the shores when the 
waters sank in a drought. 

But men remembered little of all that, though some 
still sang old songs of the dwarf-kings of the Mountain, 
Thror and Thrain of the race of Durin, and of the 
coming of the Dragon, and the fall of the lords of Dale. 
Some sang too that Thror and Thrain would come back 
one day and gold would flow in rivers through the moun¬ 
tain-gates, and all that land would be filled with new 
song and new laughter. But this pleasant legend did not 
much affect their daily business. 

As soon as the raft of barrels came in sight boats rowed 
out from the piles of the town, and voices hailed the raft- 
steerers. Then ropes were cast and oars were pulled, and 
soon the raft was drawn out of the current of the Forest 
River and towed away round the high shoulder of rock 
into the little bay of Lake-town. There it was moored not 
far from the shoreward head of the great bridge. Soon 
men would come up from the South and take some of the 
casks away, and others they would fill with goods they 
had brought to be taken back up the stream to the Wood- 
elves’ home. In the meanwhile the barrels were left afloat 

177 



THE HOBBIT 

while the elves of the raft and the boatmen went to feast 
in Lake-town. 

They would have been surprised, if they could have 
seen what happened down by the shore, after they had 
gone and the shades of night had fallen. First of all a 
barrel was cut loose by Bilbo and pushed to the shore and 
opened. Groans came from inside, and out crept a most 
unhappy dwarf. Wet straw was in his bedraggled beard; 
he was so sore and stiff, so bruised and buffeted he could 
hardly stand or stumble through the shallow water to lie 
groaning on the shore. He had a famished and a savage 
look like a dog that has been chained and forgotten in a 
kennel for a week. It was Thorin, but you could only 
have told it by his golden chain, and by the colour of his 
now dirty and tattered sky-blue hood with its tarnished 
silver tassel. It was some time before he would be even 
polite to the hobbit. 

‘Well, are you alive or are you dead?* asked Bilbo quite 
crossly. Perhaps he had forgotten that he had had at least 
one good meal more than the dwarves, and also the use of 
his arms and legs, not to speak of a greater allowance of 
air. ‘Are you still in prison, or are you free? If you want 
food, and if you want to go on with this silly adventure - 
it*s yours after all and not mine - you had better slap your 
arms and rub your legs and try and help me get the 
others out while there is a chance!* 

Thorin of course saw the sense of this, so after a few 
more groans he got up and helped the hobbit as well as 
he could. In the darkness, floundering in the cold water, 
they had a difficult and very nasty job finding which were 
the right barrels. Knocking outside and calling only dis¬ 
covered about six dwarves that could answer. These were 
unpacked and helped ashore where they sat or lay 
muttering and moaning; they were so soaked and bruised 
and cramped that they could hardly yet realize their re¬ 
lease or be properly thankful for it. 

Dwalin and Balin were two of the most unhappy, and 

178 



A WARM WEI COME 

it was no good asking them to help. Bifur and Bofur were 
less knocked about and drier, but they lay down and 
would do nothing. Fili and Kili, however, who were 
young (for dwarves) and had also been packed more 
neatly with plenty of straw into smaller casks, came out 
more or less smiling, with onh a bruise or two and a 
stiffness that soon wore off. 

1 hope I never smell the smell of apples again I' said 
Fili. ‘My tub was full of it. To f^mell apples everlastingly 
when you can scarcely move and are cold and sick with 
hunger is maddening. I could eat anything in the wide 
world now, for hours on end - but not an apple! ‘ 

With the willing help of Fili and Kili, Thorin and 
Bilbo at last discovered the remainder of the company 
and got them out. Poor fat Bombur was asleep or sense¬ 
less; Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin and Gloin were waterlogged 
and seemed only half alive; they all had to be carried one 
by one and laid helpless on the shore. 

‘Well! Here we are I ‘ said Thorin. ‘And I suppose we 
ought to thank our stars and Mr. Baggins. I am sure he 
has a right to expect it, though I wish he could have 
arranged a more comfortable journey. Still - all very 
much at your service once more, Mr. Baggins. No doubt 
we shall feel properly grateful, when we are fed and re¬ 
covered. In the meanwhile what next?' 

‘I suggest Lake-town,' said Bilbo. ‘What else is there?' 

Nothing else could, of course, be suggested; so, leaving 
the others, Thorin and Fili and Kili and the hobbit went 
along the shore to the great bridge. There were guards at 
the head of it, but they were not keeping very careful 
watch, for it was so long since there had been any real 
need. Except for occasional squabbles about river-tolls 
they were friends with the Wood-elves. Other folk were 
far away; and some of the younger people in the town 
openly doubted the existence of any dragon in the moun¬ 
tain, and laughed at the greybeards and gammers who 
said that they had seen him flying in the sky in their 

J79 



THE HOBBIT 


young days. That being so it is not surprising that the 
guards were drinking and laughing by a fire in their hut, 
and did not hear the noise of the unpacking of the 
dwarves or the footsteps of the four scouts. Their 
astonishment was enormous when Thorin Oakenshield 
stepped in through the door. 

‘Who are you and what do you want?' they shouted, 
leaping to their feet and groping for weapons. 

‘Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror King under the 
Mountain I ’ said the dwarf in a loud voice, and he looked 
it, in spite of his torn clothes and draggled hood. The 
gold gleamed on his neck and waist; his eyes were dark 
and deep. ‘I have come back. I wish to see the Master of 
your town!' 

Then there was tremendous excitement. Some of the 
more foolish ran out of the hut as if they expected the 
Mountain to go golden in the night and all the waters of 
the lake turn yellow right away. The captain of the guard 
came forward. 

‘And who are these?' he asked, pointing to Fili and Kili 
and Bilbo. 

‘The sons of my father's daughter,' answered Thorin, 
‘Fili and Kili of the race of Durin, and Mr. Baggins who 
has travelled with us out of the West.' 

‘If you come in peace lay down your armsl’ said the 
captain. 

‘We have none,' said Thorin, and it was true enough: 
their knives had been taken from them by the wood-elves, 
and the great sword Orcrist too. Bilbo had his short 
sword, hidden as usual, but he said nothing about that. 
*We have no need of weapons, who return at last to our 
own as spoken of old. Nor could we fight against so many. 
Take us to your master!' 

‘He is at feast,' said the captain. 

‘Then all the more reason for taking us to him,' burst 
in Fili, who was getting impatient at these solemnities. 
‘We are worn and famished after our long road and we 

180 



A WARM WE3.GOME 

have sick comrades. Now make haste and let us have no 
more words, or your master may have something to say to 
you.' 

‘Follow me then,* said the captain, and with six men 
about them he led them over the bridge, through the 
gates and into the market-place of the town. This was a 
wide circle of quiet water surrounded by the tall piles on 
which were built the greater houses, and by long wooden 
quays with many steps and ladders going down to the 
surface of the lake. From one great hall shone many lights 
and there came the sound of many voices. They passed its 
doors and stood blinking in the light, looking at long 
tables filled with folk. 

‘I am Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror King under 
the Mountain I I return! * cried Thorin in a loud voice 
from the door, before the captain could say anything. 

All leaped to their feet. The Master of the town sprang 
from his great chair. But none rose in greater surprise 
than the raft-men of the elves who were sitting at the 
lower end of the hall. Pressing forward before the 
Master's table they cried: 

‘These are prisoners of our king that have escaped, 
wandering vagabond dwarves that could not give any 
good account of themselves, sneaking through the woods 
and molesting our people!' 

‘Is this true?* asked the Master. As a matter of fact he 
thought it far more likely than the return of the King 
under the Mountain, if any such person had ever existed. 

‘It is true that we were wrongfully waylaid by the 
Elvenking and imprisoned without cause as we 
journeyed back to our own land,’ answered Thorin. ‘But 
lock nor bar may hinder the homecoming spoken of old. 
Nor is this town in the Wood-elves' realm. I speak to the 
Master of the town of the Men of the lake, not to the raft- 
men of the king.' 

Then the Master hesitated and looked from one to the 
other. The Elvenking was very powerful in those parts 

i8i 



THE HOBBIT 


and the Master wished for no enmity with him, nor did 
he think much of old songs, giving his mind to trade and 
tolls, to cargoes and gold, to which habit he owed his 
position. Others were of different mind, however, and 
quickly the matter was settled without him. The news 
had spread from the doors of the hall like fire through all 
the town. People were shouting inside the hall and out¬ 
side it. The quays were thronged with hurrying feet 
Some began to sing snatches of old songs concerning the 
return of the King under the Mountain; that it was 
Thror’s grandson not Thror himself that had come back 
did not bother them at all. Others took up the song and 
it rolled loud and high over the lake. 

The King beneath the mountains, 

The King of carven stone, 

The lord of silxjer fountains 
Shall come into his own! 

His crown shall be upholden. 

His harp shall be restrung, 

His halls shall echo golden 
To songs of yore re-sung. 

The woods shall wave on mountains 
And grass beneath the sun; 

His wealth shall flow in fountains 
And the rivers golden run. 

The streams shall run in gladness, 

The lakes shall shine and burn. 

All sorrow fail and sadness 
At the Mountain-king's return! 

So they sang, or very like that, only there was a great 
deal more of it, and there was much shouting as well as 
the music of harps and of fiddles mixed up with it. 

182 



A WARM WEICOME 

Indeed such excitement had not been known in the town 
in the memory of the oldest grandfather. The Wood-elves 
themselves began to wonder greatly and even to be 
afraid. They did not know of ‘ourse how Thorin had 
escaped, and they began to think their king might have 
made a serious mistake. As for fhe Master he saw there 
was nothing else for it but to o^ey the general clamour, 
for the moment at any rate, and to pretend to believe 
that Thorin was what he said. So he gave up to him his 
own great chair and set Fili and Kili beside him in places 
of honour. Even Bilbo was given a seat at the high table, 
and no explanaton of where he came in - no songs had 
alluded to him even in the obscurest way - was asked for 
in the general bustle. 

Soon afterwards the other dwarves were brought into 
the town amid scenes of astonishing enthusiasm. They 
were all doctored and fed and housed and pampered in 
the most delightful and satisfactory fashion. A large 
house was given up to Thorin and his company; boats 
and rowers were put at their service; and crowds sat out¬ 
side and sang songs all day, or cheered if any dwarf 
showed so much as his nose. 

Some of the songs were old ones; but some of them 
were quite new and spoke confidently of the sudden 
death of the dragon and of cargoes of rich presents 
coming down the river to Lake-town. These were in¬ 
spired largely by the Master and they did Hot particularly 
please the dwarves, but in the meantime they were well 
contented and they quickly grew fat and strong again. 
Indeed within a week they were quite recovered, fitted 
out in fine cloth of their proper colours, with beards 
combed and trimmed, and proud steps. Thorin looked 
and walked as if his kingdom was already regained and 
Smaug chopped up into little pieces. 

Then, as he had said, the dwarves* good feeling towards 
the little hobbit grew stronger every day. There were no 
more groans or grumbles. They drank his health, and 

183 



THE HOBBIT 


they patted him on the back, and they made a great fuss 
of him; which was just as well, for he was not feeling 
particularly cheerful. He had not forgotten the look of 
the Mountain, nor the thought of the dragon, and he had 
beside a shocking cold. For three days he sneezed and 
coughed, and he could not go out, and even after that his 
speeches at banquets were limited to ‘Thag you very 
buch.’ 

In the meanwhile the Wood-elves had gone back up 
the Forest River with their cargoes, and there was great 
excitement in the king’s palace. I have never heard what 
happened to the chief of the guards and the butler. Noth¬ 
ing of course was ever said about keys or barrels while the 
dwarves stayed in Lake-town, and Bilbo was careful 
never to become invisible. Still, I daresay, more was 
guessed than was known, though doubtless Mr. Baggins 
remained a bit of a mystery. In any case the king knew 
now the dwarves’ errand, or thought he did, and he said 
to himself: 

‘Very well I We’ll see! No treasure will come back 
through Mirk wood without my having something to say 
in the matter. But I expect they will all come to a bad 
end, and serve them right!’ He at any rate did not be¬ 
lieve in dwarves fighting and killing dragons like Smaug, 
and he strongly suspected attempted burglary or some¬ 
thing like it - which shows he was a wise elf and wiser 
than the men of the town, though not quite right, as we 
shall see in the end. He sent out his spies about the shores 
of the lake and as far northward towards the Mountain 
as they would go, and waited. 

At the end of a fortnight Thorin began to think of 
departure. While the enthusiasm still lasted in the town 
was the time to get help. It would not do to let every¬ 
thing cool down with delay. So he spoke to the Master 
and his councillors and said that soon he and his com¬ 
pany must go on towards the Mountain. 

184 



A WARM WEH^OME 


Then for the first time the Master was surprised and a 
little frightened; and he wondered if Thorin was after all 
really a descendant of the old kings. He had never 
thought that the dwarves would actually dare to 
approach Smaug, but believed they were frauds who 
would sooner or later be discove red and be turned out. 
He was wrong. Thorin, of course, was really the grandson 
of the King under the Mountain, and there is no know¬ 
ing what a dwarf will not dare and do for revenge or the 
recovery of his own. 

But the Master was not sorry at all to let them go. 
They were expensive to keep, and their arrival had 
turned things into a long holiday in which business was 
at a standstill. ‘Let them go and bother Smaug, and see 
how he welcomes them!* he thought. ‘Certainly, O 
Thorin Thrain’s son Thror*s son I ’ was what he said. ‘You 
must claim your own. The hour is at hand, spoken of old. 
What help we can offer shall be yours, and we trust to 
your gratitude when your kingdom is regained.* 

So one day, although autumn was now getting far on, 
and winds were cold, and leaves were falling fast, three 
large boats left Lake-town, laden with rowers, dwarves, 
Mr. Baggins, and many provisions. Horses and ponies 
had been sent round by circuitous paths to meet them at 
their appointed landing-place. The Master and his 
councillors bade them farewell from the great steps of the 
town-hall that went down to the lake. People sang on the 
quays and out of windows. The white oars dipped and 
splashed, and off they went north up the lake on the last 
stage of their long journey. The only person thoroughly 
unhappy was Bilbo. 


185 



II On the doorstep 

In two days going they rowed right up the Long Lake 
and passed out into the River Running, and now they 
could all see the Lonely Mountain towering grim and 
tall before them. The stream was strong and their going 
slow. At the end of the third day, some miles up the river, 
they drew in to the left or western bank and dis¬ 
embarked. Here they were joined by the horses with 
other provisions and necessaries and the ponies for their 
own use that had been sent to meet them. They packed 
what they could on the ponies and the rest was made into 
a store under a tent, but none of the men of the town 
would stay with them even for the night so near the 
shadow of the Mountain. 

‘Not at any rate until the songs have come true I ‘ said 
they. It was easier to believe in the Dragon and less easy 
to believe in Thorin in these wild parts. Indeed their 
stores had no need of any guard, for all the land was 
desolate and empty. So their escort left them, making off 
swiftly down the river and the shoreward paths, although 
the night was already drawing on. 

They spent a cold and lonely night and their spirits 
fell. The next day they set out again. Balin and Bilbo 
rode behind, each leading another pony heavily laden 
beside him; the others were some way ahead picking out 
a slow road, for there were no paths. They made north¬ 
west, slanting away from the River Running, and draw¬ 
ing ever nearer and nearer to a great spur of the Moun¬ 
tain that was flung out southwards towards them. 

It was a weary journey, and a quiet and stealthy one. 
There was no laughter or song or sound of harps, and the 
pride and hopes which had stirred in their hearts at the 
singing of old songs by the lake died away to a plodding 

186 



ON THE DOORSTEP 

gloom. They knew that they were drawing near to the 
end of their journey, and that it might be a very horrible 
end. The land ateut them grew bleak and barren, 
though once, as Thorin told them, it had been green and 
fair. There was little grass, and before long there was 
neither bush nor tree, and only broken and blackened 
stumps to speak of ones long vanished. They were come 
to the Desolation of the Dragon, and they were come at 
the waning of the year. 

They reached the skirts of the Mountain all the same 
without meeting any danger or any sign of the Dragon 
other than the wilderness he had made about his lair. 
The Mountain lay dark and silent before them and ever 
higher above them. They made their first camp on the 
western side of the great southern spur, which ended in a 
height called Ravenhill. On this there had been an old 
watch-post; but they dared not climb it yet, it was too 
exposed. 

Before setting out to search the western spurs of the 
Mountain for the hidden door, on which all their hopes 
rested, Thorin sent out a scouting expedition to spy out 
the land to the South where the Front Gate stood. For 
this purpose he chose Balin and Fili and Kili, and with 
them went Bilbo. They marched under the grey and 
silent cliffs to the feet of Ravenhill. There the river, after 
winding a wide loop over the valley of Dale, turned from 
the Mountain on its road to the Lake, flowing swift and 
noisily. Its bank was bare and rocky, tall and steep above 
the stream; and gazing out from it over the narrow water, 
foaming and splashing among many boulders, they could 
see in the wide valley shadowed by the Mountain's arms 
the grey ruins of ancient houses, towers, and walls. 

‘There lies all that is left of Dale,’ said Balin. ‘The 
mountain’s sides were green with woods and all the 
sheltered valley rich and pleasant in the days when the 
bells rang in that town.’ He looked both sad and grim as 

187 



THE HOBBIT 


he said this: he had been one of Thorin’s companions on 
the day the Dragon came. 

They did not dare to follow the river much further 
towards the Gate; but they went on beyond the end of 
the southern spur, until lying hidden behind a rock they 
could look out and see the dark cavernous opening in a 
great cliff-wall between the arms of the Mountain. Out of 
it the waters of the Running River sprang; and out of it 
too there came a steam and a dark smoke. Nothing 
moved in the waste, save the vapour and the water, and 
every now and again a black and ominous crow. The only 
sound was the sound of the stony water, and every now 
and again the harsh croak of a bird. Balin shuddered. 

‘Let us return!' he said. ‘We can do no good here I And 
I don't like these dark birds, they look like spies of evil.’ 

‘The dragon is still alive and in the halls under the 
Mountain then - or I imagine so from the smoke,’ said 
the Hobbit. 

‘That does not prove it,’ said Balin, ‘though I don’t 
doubt you are right. But he might be gone away some 
time, or he might be lying out on the mountain-side 
keeping watch, and still 1 expect smokes and steams 
would come out of the gates: all the halls within must be 
filled with his foul reek.’ 

With such gloomy thoughts, followed ever by croaking 
crows above them, they made their weary way back to the 
camp. Only in June they had been guests in the fair 
house of Elrond, and though autumn was now^ crawling 
towards winter that pleasant time now seemed years ago. 
They were alone in the perilous waste without hope of 
further help. They were at the end of their journey, but 
as far as ever, it seemed, from the end of their quest. 
None of them had much spirit left. 

Now strange to say Mr. Baggins had more than the 
others. He would often borrow Thorin’s map and gaze at 
it, pondering over the runes and the message of the moon* 

188 



ON THE DOORSTEP 

letters Elrond had read. It was hr that made the dwarves 
begin the dangerous search on the western slopes for the 
secret door. They moved their camp then to a long valley, 
narrower than the great dale in the South where the 
Gates of the river stood, and walled with lower spurs of 
the Mountain. Two of these ht re thrust forward west 
from the main mass in long stet p-sided ridges that fell 
ever downwards towards the plam. On this western side 
there were fewer signs of the dragon’s marauding feet, 
and there was some grass for their ponies. From this 
western camp, shadowed all day by cliff and wall until 
the sun began to sink towards the forest, day by day they 
toiled in parties searching for paths up the mountain¬ 
side. If the map was true, somewhere high above the cliff 
at the valley’s head must stand the secret door. Day by 
day they came back to their camp without success. 

But at last unexpectedly they found what they were 
seeking. Fili and Kili and the hobbit went back one day 
down the valley and scrambled among the tumbled rocks 
at its southern corner. About midday, creeping behind a 
great stone that stood alone like a pillar. Bilbo came on 
what looked like rough steps going upwards. Following 
these excitedly he and the dwarves found traces of a 
narrow track, often lost, often rediscovered, that wan¬ 
dered on to the top of the southern ridge and brought 
them at last to a still narrower ledge, which turned north 
across the face of the Mountain. Looking down they saw 
that they were at the top of the cliff at the valley’s head 
and were gazing down on to their own camp below. 
Silently, clinging to the rocky wall on their right, they 
went in single file along the ledge, till the wall opened 
and they turned into a little steep-walled bay, grassy- 
floored, still and quiet. Its entrance which they had 
found could not be seen from below because of the over¬ 
hang of the cliff, nor from further off because it was so 
small that it looked like a dark crack and no more. It was 
not a cave and was open to the sky above; but at its inner 

189 



THE HOBBIT 


end a flat wall rose up that in the lower part, close to the 
ground, was as smooth and upright as masons’ work, but 
without a joint or crevice to be seen. No sign was there 
of post or lintel or threshold, nor any sign of bar or bolt 
or key-hole; yet they did not doubt that they had found 
the door at last. 

They beat on it, they thrust and pushed at it, they 
implored it to move, they spoke fragments of broken 
spells of opening, and nothing stirred. At last tired out 
they rested on the grass at its feet, and then at evening 
began their long climb down. 

There was excitement in the camp that night. In the 
morning they prepared to move once more. Only Bofur 
and Bombur were left behind to guard the ponies and 
such stores as they had brought with them from the river. 
The others went down the valley and up the newly found 
path, and so to the narrow ledge. Along this they could 
carry no bundles or packs, so narrow and breathless was 
it, with a fall of a hundred and fifty feet beside them on 
to sharp rocks below; but each of them took a good coil 
of rope wound tight about his waist, and so at last with¬ 
out mishap they reached the little grassy bay. 

There they made their third camp, hauling up what 
they needed from below with their ropes. Down the same 
way they were able occasionally to lower one of the more 
active dwarves such as Kili, to exchange such news as 
there was, or to take a share in the guard below, while 
Bofur was hauled up to the higher camp. Bombur would 
not come up either the rope or the path. 

1 am too fat for such fly-walks,’ he said. *1 should turn 
dizzy and tread on my beard, and then you would be thir¬ 
teen again. And the knotted ropes are too slender for my 
weight.’ Luckily for him that was not true, as you will see. 

In the meanwhile some of them explored the ledge 
beyond the opening and found a path that led higher 

190 



ON THE DOORSTEP 

and higher on to the mountain; l)ut they did not dare to 
venture very far that way, nor was there much use in it. 
Out up there a silence reigned, broken by no bird or 
sound except that of the wind in the crannies of stone. 
They spoke low and never called or sang, for danger 
brooded in every rock. The otht rs who were busy with 
the secret of the door had no more success. They were too 
eager to trouble about the runes or the moon-letters, but 
tried without resting to discover where exactly in the 
smooth face of the rock the dooi was hidden. They had 
brought picks and tools of manv sorts from Lake-town, 
and at first they tried to use these. But when they struck 
the stone the handles splintered and jarred their arms 
cruelly, and the steel heads broke or bent like lead. 
Mining work, they saw clearly was no good against the 
magic that had shut this door; and they grew terrified, 
too, of the echoing noise. 

Bilbo found sitting on the doorstep lonesome and 
wearisome - there was not a doorstep, of course, really, 
but they used to call the little grassy space between the 
wall and the opening the ‘doorstep’ in fun, remembering 
Bilbo’s words long ago at the unexpected party in his 
hobbit-hole, when he said they could sit on the doorstep 
till they thought of something. And sit and think they 
did, or wandered aimlessly about, and glummer and 
glummer they became. 

Their spirits had risen a little at the discovery of the 
path, but now they sank into their boots; and yet they 
would not give up and go away. The hobbit was no 
longer much brighter than the dwarves. He would do 
nothing but sit with his back to the rock-face and stare 
away west through the opening, over the cliff, over the 
wide lands to the black wall of Mirkwood, and to the 
distances beyond, in which he sometimes thought he 
could catch glimpses of the Misty Mountains small and far. 
If the dwarves asked him what he was doing be answered: 

‘You said sitting on the doorstep and thinking would 

191 



THE HOBBIT 


be my job, not to mention getting inside, so I am sitting and 
thinking/ But I am afraid he was not thinking much of the 
job, but of what lay beyond the blue distance, the quiet 
Western Land and the Hill and his hobbit-hole under it. 

A large grey stone lay in the centre of the grass and he 
stared moodily at it or watched the great snails. They 
seemed to love the little shut-in bay with its walls of cool 
rock, and there were many of them of huge size crawling 
slowly and stickily along its sides. 

‘Tomorrow begins the last week of Autumn,' said 
Thorin one day. 

‘And winter comes after autumn,' said Bifur. 

‘And next year after that,' said Dwalin, ‘and our beards 
will grow till they hang down the cliff to the valley before 
anything happens here. What is our burglar doing for 
us? Since he has got an invisible ring, and ought to be a 
specially excellent performer now, I am beginning to 
think he might go through the Front Gate and spy things 
out a biti' 

Bilbo heard this - the dwarves were on the rocks just 
above the enclosure where he was sitting - and ‘Good 
Gracious!' he thought, ‘so that is what they are begin¬ 
ning to think, is it? It is always poor me that has to get 
them out of their difficulties, at least since the wizard left. 
Whatever am I going to do? I might have known that 
something dreadful would happen to me in the end. I 
don't think I could bear to see the unhappy valley of 
Dale again, and as for that steaming gate! I !' 

That night he was very miserable and hardly slept. 
Next day the dwarves all went wandering off in various 
directions; some were exercising the ponies down below, 
some were roving about the mountain-side. All day Bilbo 
sat gloomily in the grassy bay gazing at the stone, or out 
west through the narrow opening. He had a queer feeling 
that he was waiting tor something. ‘Perhaps the wizard 
will suddenly come back today,’ he thought. 

19^ 



ON THE DOORSTEP 

If he lifted his head he could see a glimpse of the dis¬ 
tant forest. As the sun turned wi st there was a gleam of 
yellow upon its far roof, as if the light caught the last 
pale leaves. Soon he saw the orarige ball of the sun sink¬ 
ing towards the level of his eyes, lie went to the opening 
and there pale and faint was a thiii new moon above the 
rim of Earth. 

At that very moment he heard a sharp crack behind 
him. There on the grey stone in the grass was an enor¬ 
mous thrush, nearly coal black, its pale yellow breast 
freckled with dark spots. Crack! It had caught a snail 
and was knocking it on the stone. Crack! Crack! 

Suddenly Bilbo understood. Forgetting all danger he 
stood on the ledge and hailed the dwarves, shouting and 
waving. Those that were nearest came tumbling over the 
rocks and as fast as they could along the ledge to him, 
wondering what on earth was the matter; the others 
shouted to be hauled up the ropes (except Bombur, of 
course; he was asleep). 

Quickly Bilbo explained. They all fell silent: the 
hobbit standing by the grey stone, and the dwarves with 
wagging beards watching impatiently. The sun sank 
lower and lower, and their hopes fell. It sank into a belt 
of reddened cloud and disappeared. The dwarves 
groaned, but still Bilbo stood almost without moving. 
The little moon was dipping to the horizon. Evening was 
coming on. Then suddenly when their hope was lowest a 
red ray of the sun escaped like a finger through a rent in 
the cloud. A gleam of light came straight through the 
opening into the bay and fell on the smooth rock-face. 
The old thrush, who had been watching from a high 
perch with beady eyes and head cocked on one side, gave 
a sudden trill. There was a loud crack. A flake of rock 
split from the wall and fell. A hole appeared suddenly 
about three feet from the ground. 

Quickly, trembling lest the chance should fade, the 
dwarves rushed to the rock and pushed - in vain. 

193 



THE HOBBIT 


‘The key! The key! * cried Bilbo. ‘Where is Thorin?* 

Thorin hurried up. 

‘The key! ’ shouted Bilbo. ‘The key that went with the 
map! Try it now while there is still time!’ 

Then Thorin stood up and drew the key on its chain 
from round his neck. He put it to the hole. It fitted and it 
turned! Snap! The gleam went out, the sun sank, the 
moon was gone, and evening sprang into the sky. 

Now they all pushed together, and slowly a part of the 
rock-wall gave way. Long straight cracks appeared and 
widened. A door five feet high and three broad was out¬ 
lined, and slowly without a sound swung inwards. Ji 
seemed as if darkness flowed out like a vapour from the 
hole in the mountain-side, and deep darkness in which 
nothing could be seen lay before their eyes, a yawning 
mouth leading in and down. 


12 Inside information 

For a long time the dwarves stood in the dark before the 
door and debated, until at last Thorin spoke: 

‘Now is the time for our esteemed Mr, Baggins, who 
has proved himself a good companion on our long road, 
and a hobbit full of courage and resource far exceeding 
his size, and if I may say so possessed of good luck far 
exceeding the usual allowance - now is the time for 
him to perform the service for which he was included 
in our Company; now is the time for him to earn his 
reward.' 

You are familiar with Thorin's style on important 
occasions, so I will not give you any more of it, though he 
went on a good deal longer than this. It certainly was an 
important occasion, but Bilbo felt impatient. By now he 

194 



INSIDE INFORM\TION 

was quite familiar with Thorin too, and he knew what he 
was driving at. 

If you mean you think it is my job to go into the secret 
passage first, O Thorin Thrain's son Oakenshield, may 
your beard grow even longer,* hr said crossly, ‘say so at 
once and have done 1 I might rel ase. I have got you out 
of two messes already, which wer(‘ hardly in the original 
bargain, so that I am, I think, ahrady owed some reward. 
But “third time pays for all'* as m\ father used to say, and 
somehow I don't think I shall refuse. Perhaps I have 
begun to trust my luck more than I used to in the old 
days' he meant last spring before he left his own house, 
but it seemed centuries ago - ‘but anyway I think I will 
go and have a peep at once and get it over. Now who is 
coming with me?' 

He did not expect a chorus of volunteers, so he was not 
disappointed. Fili and Kili looked uncomfortable and 
stood on one leg, but the others made no pretence of 
offering - except old Balin, the look-out man, who was 
rather fond of the hobbit. He said he would come inside 
at least and perhaps a bit of the way too, ready to call for 
help if necessary. 

The most that can be said for the dwarves is this: they 
intended to pay Bilbo really handsomely for his services; 
they had brought him to do a nasty job for them, and 
they did not mind the poor little fellow doing it if he 
would; but they would all have done their best to get 
him out of trouble, if he got into it, as they did in the 
case “of the trolls at the beginning of their adventures 
before they had any particular reasons for being grateful 
to him. There it is: dwarves are not heroes, but calculat¬ 
ing folk with a great idea of the value of money; some are 
tricky and treacherous and pretty bad lots; some are not, 
but are decent enough people like Thorin and Company, 
if you don't expect too much. 


The stars were coming out behind him in a pale sky 

195 



THE HOBBIT 


barred with black when the hobbit crept through the 
enchanted door and stole into the Mountain. It was far 
easier going than he expected. This was no goblin en¬ 
trance, or rough wood-elves* cave. It was a passage made 
by dwarves, at the height of their wealth and skill: 
straight as a ruler, smooth-floored and smooth-sided, 
going with a gentle never-varying slope direct - to some 
distant end in the blackness below. 

After a while Balin bade Bilbo ‘Good luck!’ and 
stopped where he could still see the faint outline of the 
door, and by a trick of the echoes of the tunnel hear the 
rustle of the whispering voices of the others just outside. 
Then the hobbit slipped on his ring, and warned by the 
echoes to take more than hobbit’s care to make no sound, 
he crept noiselessly down, down, down into the dark. He 
was trembling with fear, but his little face was set and 
grim. Already he was a very different hobbit from the one 
that had run out without a pocket-handkerchief from 
Bag-End long ago. He had not had a pocket-handkerchief 
for ages. He loosened his dagger in its sheath, tightened 
his belt, and went on. 

'Now you are in for it at last, Bilbo Baggins,’ he said to 
himself. ‘You went and put your foot right in it that 
night of the party, and now you have got to pull it out 
and pay for it! Dear me, what a fool I was and am! * said 
the least Tookish part of him. 'I have absolutely no use 
for dragon-guarded treasures, and the whole lot could 
stay here for ever, if only I could wake up and find this 
beastly tunnel was my own front-hall at home I ’ 

He did not wake up of course, but went still on and on, 
till all sign of the door behind had faded away. He was 
altogether alone. Soon he thought it was beginning to 
feel warm. Is that a kind of a glow I seem to see coming 
right ahead down there?* he thought. 

It was. As he went forward it grew and grew, till there 
was no doubt about it. It was a red light steadily getting 

196 



INSIDE INFORMATION 

redder and redder. Also it was now undoubtedly hot in the 
tunnel. Wisps of vapour floated up and past him and he 
began to sweat. A sound, too, begun to throb in his ears, a 
sort of bubbling like the noise of i large pot galloping on 
the fire, mixed with a rumble as of a gigantic tom-cat 
purring. This grew to the unmist.ikable gurgling noise of 
some vast animal snoring in its sleep down there in the 
red glow in front of him. 

It was at this point that Bilbo stopped. Going on from 
there was the bravest thing he ever did. The tremendous 
things that happened aferwards were as nothing com¬ 
pared to it. He fought the real battle in that tunnel alone, 
before he ever saw the vast danger that lay in wait. At 
any rate after a short halt go on he did; and you can 
picture him coming to the end of the tunnel, an opening 
of much the same size and shape as the door above. 
Through it peeps the hobbit’s little head. Before him lies 
that great bottom-most cellar or dungeon-hole of the 
ancient dwarves right at the Mountain’s root. It is almost 
dark so that its vastness can only be dimly guessed, but 
rising from the near side of the rocky floor there is a great 
glow. The glow of Smaugl 

There he lay, a vast red-golden dragon, fast asleep; a 
thrumming came from his jaws and nostrils, and wisps of 
smoke, but his fires were low in slumber. Beneath him, 
under all his limbs and his huge coiled tail, and about 
him on all sides stretching away across the unseen floors, 
lay countless piles of precious things, gold wrought and 
unwrought, gems and jewels, and silver red-stained in the 
ruddy light. 

Smaug lay, with wings folded like an immeasurable 
bat, turned partly on one side, so that the hobbit could 
see his underparts and his long pale belly crusted with 
gems and fragments of gold from his long lying on his 
costly bed. Behind him where the walls were nearest 
Could dimly be seen coats of mail, helms and axes, swords 

»97 



THE HOBBIT 


and spears hanging; and there in rows stood great jars 
and vessels filled with a wealth that could not be guessed. 

To say that Bilbo’s breath was taken away is no de¬ 
scription at all. There are no words left to express his 
staggerment, since Men changed the language that they 
learned of elves in the days when all the world was 
wonderful. Bilbo had heard tell and sing of dragon- 
hoards before, but the splendour, the lust, the glory of 
such treasure had never yet come home to him. His heart 
was filled and pierced with enchantment and with the 
desire of dwarves; and he gazed motionless, almost for¬ 
getting the frightful guardian, at the gold beyond price 
and count. 

He gazed for what seemed an age, before drawn almost 
against his will, he stole from the shadow of the doorway, 
across the floor to the nearest edge of the mounds of 
treasure. Above him the sleeping dragon lay, a dire 
menace even in his sleep. He grasped a great two-handled 
cup, as heavy as he could carry, and cast one fearful eye 
upwards. Smaug stirred a wing, opened a claw, the 
rumble of his snoring changed its note. 

Then Bilbo fled. But the dragon did not wake - not 
yet - but shifted into other dreams of greed and violence, 
lying there in his stolen hall while the little hobbit toiled 
back up the long tunnel. His heart was beating and a 
more fevered shaking was in his legs than when he was 
going down, but still he clutched the cup, and his chief 
thought was: I’ve done it! This will show them. “More 
like a grocer than a burglar” indeed! Well, we’ll hear no 
more of that.’ 

Nor did he. Balin was overjoyed to see the hobbit 
again, and as delighted as he was surprised. He picked 
Bilbo up and carried him out into the open air. It was 
midnight and clouds had covered the stars, but Bilbo lay 
with his eyes shut, gasping and taking pleasure in the feel 
erf the fresh air again, and hardly noticing the excitement 

108 



INSIDE INFORMATION 


of the dwarves, or how they praised him and patted him 
on the back and put themselves ^md all their families for 
generations to come at his service. 

The dwarves were still passing the cup from hand to 
hand and talking delightedly of the recovery of their 
treasure, when suddenly a vast rumbling woke in the 
mountain underneath as if it was an old volcano that had 
made up its mind to start eruptions once again. The door 
behind them was pulled nearly to, and blocked from 
closing with a stone, but up the long tunnel came the 
dreadful echoes, from far down in the depths, of a 
bellowing and a trampling that made the ground be¬ 
neath them tremble. 

Then the dwarves forgot their joy and their confident 
boasts of a moment before and cowered down in fright. 
Smaug was still to be reckoned with. It does not do to 
leave a live dragon out of your calculations, if you live 
near him. Dragons may not have much real use for all 
their wealth, but they know it to an ounce as a rule, 
especially after long possession; and Smaug was no ex¬ 
ception. He had passed from an uneasy dream (in which 
a warrior, altogether insignificant in size but provided 
with a bitter sword and great courage, figured most un¬ 
pleasantly) to a doze, and from a doze to wide waking. 
There was a breath of strange air in his cave. Could there 
be a draught from that little hole? He had never felt 
quite happy about it, though it was so small, and now he 
glared at it in suspicion and wondered why he had never 
blocked it up. Of late he had half fancied he had caught 
the dim echoes of a knocking sound from far above that 
came down through it to his lair. He stirred and stretched 
forth his neck to sniff. Then he missed the cup! 

Thieves! Fire! Murder! Such a thing had not hap¬ 
pened since first he came to the Mountain! His rage 
passes description - the sort of rdagt that is only seen when 
rich folk that have more than diey can enjoy suddenly 

199 



THE HOBBIT 


lose something that they have long had but have never 
before used or wanted. His fire belched forth, the hall 
smoked, he shook the mountain-roots. He thrust his head 
in vain at the little hole, and then coiling his length to¬ 
gether, roaring like thunder underground, he sped from 
his deep lair through its great door, out into the huge 
passages of the mountain-palace and up towards the 
Front Gate. 

To hunt the whole mountain till he had caught the 
thief and had torn and trampled him was his one 
thought. He issued from the Gate, the waters rose in 
fierce whistling steam, and up he soared blazing into the 
air and settled on the mountain-top in a spout of green 
and scarlet flame. The dwarves heard the awful rumour 
of his flight, and they crouched against the walls of the 
grassy terrace cringing under boulders, hoping somehow 
to escape the fri^uful eyes of the hunting dragon. 

There they wouBSf have all been killed, if it had not 
been for Bilbo once again. ‘Quick! Quick!' he gasped. 
‘The door! The tunnel! It's no good here.* 

Roused by these words they were just about to creep 
inside the tunnel when Bifur gave a cry: ‘My cousins! 
Bombur and Bofur - we have forgotten them, they are 
down in the valley! * 

‘They will be slain, and all our ponies too, and all our 
stores lost,’ moaned the others. ‘We can do nothing.’ 

‘Nonsense!’ said Thorin, recovering his dignity. ‘We 
cannot leave them. Get inside Mr. Baggins and Balin, 
and you two Fili and Kili - the dragon shan’t have all of 
us. Now you others, where are the ropes? Be quick! ’ 

Those were perhaps the worst moments they had been 
through yet. The horrible sounds of Smaug’s anger were 
echoing in the stony hollows far above; at any moment be 
might come blazing down or fly whirling round and find 
them there, near the perilous cliff’s edge hauling madly 
on the ropes. Up came Bofur, and still all was safe. Up 
came Bombur, puffing and blowing while the ropes 

200 



INSIDE INFORMATION 

creaked, and still all was safe. I'p came some tools and 
bundles of stores, and then danger was upon them. 

A whirring noise was heard. \ red light touched the 
points of standing rocks. The dragon came. 

They had barely time to fly bac:k to the tunnel, pulling 
and dragging in their bundles, when Smaug came hurt¬ 
ling from the North, licking the mountain-sides with 
flame, beating his great wings with a noise like a roaring 
wind. His hot breath shrivelled the grass before the door, 
and drove in through the crack they had left and 
scorched them as they lay hid. Flickering fires leaped up 
and black rock-shadows danced. Then darkness fell as he 
passed again. The ponies screamed with terror, burst 
their ropes and galloped wildly off. The dragon swooped 
and turned to pursue them, and was gone. 

‘Thatll be the end of our poor beasts I' said Thorin. 
‘Nothing can escape Smaug once he sees it. Here we are 
and here we shall have to stay, unless any one fancies 
tramping the long open miles back to the river with 
Smaug on the watch 1' 

It was not a pleasant thought! They crept further 
down the tunnel, and there they lay and shivered though 
it was warm and stuffy, until dawn came pale through 
the crack of the door. Every now and again through the 
night they could hear the roar of the flying dragon grow 
and then pass and fade, as he hunted round and round 
the mountain-sides. 

He guessed from the ponies, and from the traces of the 
camps he had discovered, that men had come up from the 
river and the lake and had scaled the mountain-side from 
the valley where the ponies had been standing; but the 
door withstood his searching eye, and the little high- 
walled bay had kept out his fiercest flames. Long he had 
hunted in vain till the dawn chilled his wrath and he 
went back to his golden couch to sleep - and to gather 
new strength. He would not forget or forgive the theft, 
not if a thousand years turned him to smouldering stone, 

901 



THE HOBBIT 


but he could afford to wait. Slow and silent he crept back 
to his lair and half closed his eyes. 

When morning came the terror of the dwarves grew 
less. They realized that dangers of this kind were inevit¬ 
able in dealing with such a guardian, and that it was no 
good giving up their quest yet. Nor could they get away 
just now, as Thorin had pointed out. Their ponies were 
lost or killed, and they would have to wait some time 
before Smaug relaxed his watch sufficiently for them to 
dare the long way on foot. Luckily they had saved 
enough of their stores to last them still for some time. 

They debated long on what was to be done, but they 
could think of no way of getting rid of Smaug - which 
had always been a weak point in their plans, as Bilbo felt 
inclined to point out. Then as is the nature of folk that 
are thoroughly perplexed, they began to grumble at the 
hobbit, blaiming him for what had at first so pleased 
them: for bringing away a cup and stirring up Smaug’s 
wrath so soon. 

‘What else do you suppose a burglar is to do?' asked 
Bilbo angrily. *I was not engaged to kill dragons, that is 
warrior's work, but to steal treasure. I made the best be¬ 
ginning I could. Did you expect me to trot back with the 
whole hoard of Thror on my back? If there is any grumb¬ 
ling to be done, I think I might have a say. You ought to 
have brought five hundred burglars not one. I am sure it 
reflects great credit on your grandfather, but you cannot 
pretend that you ever made the vast extent of his wealth 
clear to me. I should want hundreds of years to bring it 
all up, if I was fifty times as big, and Smaug as tame as a 
rabbit.’ 

After that of course the dwarves begged his pardon. 
‘What then do you propose we should do, Mr. Baggins?' 
asked Thorin politely. 

‘I have no idea at the moment - if you mean about 
removing the treasure. That obviously depends entirely 
on some new turn of luck and the getting rid of Smaug. 

iroa 



INSIDE INFORMATION 

Getting rid of dragons is not at ail in my line, but I will 
do my best to think about it. Pei sonally I have no hopes 
at all, and wish I was safe back at home.* 

‘Never mind that for the moment I What are we to do 
now, today?* 

‘Well, if you really want my advice, I should say we can 
do nothing but stay where we are. By day we can no 
doubt creep out safely enough to take the air. Perhaps 
before long one or two could be chosen to go back to the 
store by the river and replenish our supplies. But in the 
meanwhile everyone ought to be well inside the tunnel 
by night. 

‘Now I will make you an offer. I have got my ring and 
will creep down this very noon - then, if ever, Smaug 
ought to be napping - and see what he is up to. Perhaps 
something will turn up. “Every worm has his weak spot,** 
as my father used to say, though I am sure it was not from 
personal experience.* 

Naturally the dwarves accepted the offer eagerly. 
Already they had come to respect little Bilbo. Now he 
had become the real leader in their adventure. He had 
begun to have ideas and plans of his own. When midday 
came he got ready for another journey down into the 
Mountain. He did not like it of course, but it was not so 
bad now he knew, more or less, what was in front of him. 
Had he known more about dragons and their wily ways, 
he might have been more frightened and less hopeful of 
catching this one napping. 

The sun was shining when he started, but it was as 
dark as night in the tunnel. The light from the door, 
almost closed, soon faded as he went down. So silent was 
his going that smoke on a gentle wind could hardly have 
surpassed it, and he was inclined to feel a bit proud of 
himself as he drew near the lower door. There was only 
the very faintest glow to be seen. 

‘Old Smaug is weary and asleep,’ he thought. ‘He can*t 
see me and he won't hear me. Cheer up Bilbo I ’ He had 

sog 



THE HOBBIT 


forgotten or had never heard about dragons* sense of 
smell. It is also an awkward fact that they can keep half 
an eye open watching while they sleep, if they are sus¬ 
picious. 

Smaug certainly looked fast asleep, almost dead and 
dark, with scarcely a snore more than a whiff of unseen 
steam, when Bilbo peeped once more from the entrance. 
He was just about to step out on to the floor when he 
caught a sudden thin and piercing ray of red from under 
the drooping lid of Smaug’s left eye. He was only pre¬ 
tending to sleep! He was watching the tunnel entrance 1 
Hurriedly Bilbo stepped back and blessed the luck of his 
ring. Then Smaug spoke. 

‘Well, thief I I smell you and I feel your air. I hear your 
breath. Come along! Help yourself again, there is plenty 
and to spare 1 * 

But Bilbo was not quite so unlearned in dragon-lore as 
all that, and if Smaug hoped to get him to come nearer so 
easily he was disappointed. ‘No thank you, O Smaug the 
Tremendous! * he replied. ‘I did not come for presents. I 
only wished to have a look at you and see if you were 
truly as great as tales say. I did not believe them.’ 

‘Do you now?* said the dragon somewhat flattered, 
even though he did not believe a word of it. 

‘Truly songs and tales fall utterly short of the reality, 
O Smaug the Chiefest and Greatest of Calamities,’ re¬ 
plied Bilbo. 

‘You have nice manners for a thief and a liar,’ said the 
dragon. ‘You seem familiar with my name, but I don’t 
seem to remember smelling you before. Who are you and 
where do you come from, may I ask?* 

‘You may indeed! I come from under the hill, and 
under the hills and over the hills my paths led. And 
through the air. I am he that walks unseen.’ 

‘So I can well believe,’ said Smaug, ‘but that is hardly 
your usual name.* 



INSIDE INFORMATION 

‘I am the clue-finder, the web cutter, the stinging fly. 1 
was chosen for the lucky numbt r.* 

'Lovely titles!' sneered the dragon. ‘But lucky numbers 
don't always come off.' 

‘I am he that buries his friends alive and drowns them 
and draws them alive again from the water. I came 
from the end of a bag, but no bag went over me.' 

‘These don't sound so creditable,' scoffed Smaug. 

‘I am the friend of bears and the guest of eagles. I am 
Ringwinner and Luckwearer; and I am Barrel-rider,' 
went on Bilbo beginning to be pleased with his riddling. 

‘That's better!' said Smaug. ‘But don't let your 
imagination run away with you! * 

This of course is the way to talk to dragons, if you 
don't want to reveal your proper name (which is wise), 
and don't want to infuriate them by a flat refusal (which 
is also very wise). No dragon can resist the fascination of 
riddling talk and of wasting time trying to understand it. 
There was a lot here which Smaug did not understand at 
all (though I expect you do, since you know all about 
Bilbo's adventures to which he was referring), but he 
thought he understood enough, and he chuckled in his 
wicked inside. 

‘I thought so last night,' he smiled to himself. ‘Lake- 
men, some nasty scheme of those miserable tub-trading 
Lake-men, or I'm a lizard. I haven't been down that way 
for an age and an age; but I will soon alter that! 

‘Very well, O Barrel-rider! ’ he said aloud. ‘Maybe 
Barrel was your pony's name; and maybe not, though it 
was fat enough. You may walk unseen, but you did not 
walk all the way. Let me tell you I ate six ponies last 
night and I shall catch and eat all the others before long. 
In return for the excellent meal I will give you one piece 
of advice for your good: don't have more to do with 
dwarves than you can help!' 

‘Dwarves!' said Bilbo in pretended surprise. 

«05 



THE HOBBIT 


‘Don't talk to me I ’ said Smaug. 1 know the smell (and 
taste) of dwarf - no one better. Don't tell me that I can 
eat a dwarf-ridden pony and not know it I You'll come to 
a bad end, if you go with such friends, Thief Barrel-rider. 
I don't mind if you go back and tell them so from me.’ 
But he did not tell Bilbo that there was one smell he 
could not make out at all, hobbit-smell; it was quite out¬ 
side his experience and puzzled him mightily. 

‘I suppose you got a fair price for that cup last night?' 
he went on. ‘Come now, did you? Nothing at all! Well, 
that's just like them. And I suppose they are skulking 
outside, and your job is to do all the dangerous work and 
get what you can when I'm not looking - for them? And 
you will get a fair share? Don't you believe it! If you get 
off alive, you will be lucky.' 

Bilbo was now beginning to feel really uncomfortable. 
Whenever Smaug's roving eye, seeking for him in the 
shadows, flashed across him, he trembled, and an un¬ 
accountable desire seized hold of him to rush out and 
reveal himself and tell all the truth to Smaug. In fact he 
was in grievous danger of coming under the dragon-spell. 
But plucking up courage he spoke again. 

‘You don't know everything, O Smaug the Mighty,' 
said he. ‘Not gold alone brought us hither.' 

‘Ha! Ha! You admit the “us",' laughed Smaug. ‘Why 
not say “us fourteen" and be done with it, Mr. Lucky 
Number? I am pleased to hear that you had other busi¬ 
ness in these parts besides my gold. In that case you may, 
perhaps, not altogether waste your time. 

‘I don't know if it has occurred to you that, even if you 
could steal the gold bit by bit - a matter of a hundred 
years or so - you could not get it very far? Not much use 
on the mountain-side? Not much use in the forest? Bless 
me! Had you never thought of the catch? A fourteenth 
share, I suppose, or something like it, those were the 
terms, eh? But what about delivery? What about cart- 

ao6 



INSIDE INFORMATION 

age? What about armed guards and tolls?’ And Smaug 
laughed aloud. He had a wicked and a wily heart, and he 
knew his guesses were not far out, though he suspected 
that the Lake-men were at the back of the plans, and that 
most of the plunder was meant to stop there in the town 
by the shore that in his young days had been called 
Esgaroth. 

You will hardly believe it, but poor Bilbo was really 
very taken aback. So far all his tlioughts and energies had 
been concentrated on getting to the Mountain and find¬ 
ing the entrance. He had never bothered to wonder how 
the treasure was to be removed, certainly never how any 
part of it that might fall to his share was to be brought 
back all the way to Bag-End Under-Hill. 

Now a nasty suspicion began to grow in his mind - had 
the dwarves forgotten this important point too, or were 
they laughing in their sleeves at him all the time? That is 
the effect that dragon-talk has on the inexperienced. 
Bilbo of course ought to have been on his guard; but 
Smaug had rather an overwhelming personality. 

1 tell you,’ he said, in an effort to remain loyal to his 
friends and to keep his end up, ‘that gold was only an 
afterthought with us. We came over hill and under hill, 
by wave and wind, for Revenge, Surely, O Smaug the 
unassessably wealthy, you must realize that your success 
has made you some bitter enemies?’ 

Then Smaug really did laugh - a devastating sound 
which shook Bilbo to the floor, while far up in the tunnel 
the dwarves huddled together and imagined that the 
hobbit had come to a sudden and a nasty end. 

‘Revenge I ’ he snorted, and the light of his eyes lit the 
hall from floor to ceiling like scarlet lightning. ‘Revenge! 
The King under the Mountain is dead and where are his 
kin that dare seek revenge? Girion Lord of Dale is dead, 
and 1 have eaten his people like a wolf among sheep, and 
where are his sons’ sons that dare approach me? I kill 
where I wuh and none dare resist. I laid low the warriors 

ao7 



THE HOBBIT 


of old and their like is not in the world today. Then I 
was but young and tender. Now I am old and strong, 
strong, strong, Thief in the Shadows 1’ he gloated. *My 
armour is like tenfold shields, my teeth are swords, my 
claws spears, the shock of my tail a thunderbolt, my wings 
a hurricane, and my breath death!' 

‘I have always understood,' said Bilbo in a frightened 
squeak, ‘that dragons were softer underneath, especially 
in the region of the — er - chest; but doubtless one so 
fortified has thought of that.' 

The dragon stopped short in his boasting. ‘Your in¬ 
formation is antiquated,' he snapped. ‘I am armoured 
above and below with iron scales and hard gems. No 
blade can pierce me.' 

‘I might have guessed it,' said Bilbo. ‘Truly there can 
nowhere be found the equal of Lord Smaug the Im¬ 
penetrable. What magnificence to possess a waistcoat of 
fine diamonds 1' 

‘Yes, it is rare and wonderful, indeed,' said Smaug 
absurdly pleased. He did not know that the hobbit had 
already caught a glimpse of his peculiar under-covering 
on his previous visit, and was itching for a closer view for 
reasons of his own. The dragon rolled over. ‘Lookl' he 
said. ‘What do you say to that?' 

‘Dazzlingly marvellous! Perfect! Flawless! Stagger¬ 
ing! ' exclaimed Bilbo aloud, but what he thought inside 
was: ‘Old fool! Why there is a large patch in the hollow 
of his left breast as bare as a snail out of its shell!' 

After he had seen that Mr. Baggins' one idea was to get 
away. ‘Well, I really must not detain Your Magnificence 
any longer,' he said, ‘or keep you from much needed rest. 
Ponies take some catching, I believe, after a long start. 
And so do burglars,' he added as a parting shot, as he 
darted back and fled up the tunnel. 

It was an unfortunate remark, for the dragon spouted 
terrific flames after him, and fast though he sped up the 
slope, he had not gone nearly far enough to be coirfort- 

ao8 



INSIDE INFORMATION 

able before the ghastly head of Smaug was thrust against 
the opening behind. Luckily the whole head and jaws 
could not squeeze in, but the nostrils sent forth fire and 
vapour to pursue him, and he as nearly overcome, and 
stumbled blindly on in great pain and fear. He had been 
feeling rather pleased with th« cleverness of his con¬ 
versation with Smaug, but his mistake at the end shook 
him into better sense. 

‘Never laugh at live dragons, Bilbo you fool!* he said 
to himself, and it became a favourite saying of his later, 
and passed into a proverb. ‘You aren’t nearly through 
this adventure yet,’ he added, and that was pretty true as 
well. 

The afternoon was turning into evening when he came 
out again and stumbled and fell in a faint on the ‘door¬ 
step*. The dwarves revived him, and doctored his scorches 
as well as they could; but it was a long time before the 
hair on the back of his head and his heels grew properly 
again: it had all been singed and frizzled right down to 
the skin. In the meanwhile his friends did their best to 
cheer him up; and they were eager for his story, especially 
wanting to know why the dragon had made such an 
awful noise, and how Bilbo had escaped. 

But the hobbit was worried and uncomfortable, and 
they had difficulty in getting anything out of him. On 
thinking things over he was now regretting some of the 
things he had said to the dragon, and was not eager to 
repeat them. The old thrush was sitting on a rock near by 
with his head cocked on one side, listening to all that was 
said. It shows what an ill temper Bilbo was in: he picked 
up a stone and threw it at the thrush, which merely flut¬ 
tered aside and came back. 

‘Drat the bird 1 * said Bilbo crossly. ‘I believe be is 
listening, and I don’t like the look of him.* 

‘Leave him alone! * said Thorin. ‘The thrushes arc 
good and friendly - this is a very old bird indeed, and is 

*09 



THE HOBBIT 


maybe the last left of the ancient breed that used to live 
about here, tame to the hands of my father and grand¬ 
father. They were a long-lived and magical race, and this 
might even be one of those that were alive then, a couple 
of hundreds of years or more ago. The Men of Dale used 
to have the trick of understanding their language, and 
used them for messengers to fly to the Men of the Lake 
and elsewhere.* 

‘Well, he*ll have news to take to Lake-town all right, if 
that is what he is after,* said Bilbo; ‘though I don’t sup¬ 
pose there are any people left there that trouble with 
thrush-language.* 

‘Why what has happened?’ cried the dwarves. ‘Do get 
on with your tale! * 

So Bilbo told them all he could remember, and he con¬ 
fessed that he had a nasty feeling that the dragon guessed 
too much from his riddles added to the camps and the 
ponies. ‘I am sure he knows we came from Lake-town and 
had help from there; and I have a horrible feeling that 
his next move may be in that direction. I wish to good¬ 
ness I had never said that about Barrel-rider; it would 
make even a blind rabbit in these parts think of the Lake- 
men.’ 

‘Well, well I It cannot be helped, and it is difficult not 
to slip in talking to a dragon, or so I have always heard,* 
said Balin anxious to comfort him. ‘I think you did very 
well, if you ask me - you found out one very useful thing 
at any rate, and got home alive, and that is more than 
most can say who have had words with the likes of 
Smaug. It may be a mercy and a blessing yet to know of 
the bare patch in the old Worm’s diamond waistcoat.’ 

That turned the conversation, and they all began dis¬ 
cussing dragon-slayings historical, dubious, and mythical, 
and the various sorts of stabs and jabs and undercuts, and 
the different arts devices and stratagems by which they 
had been accomplished. The general opinion was that 
catching a dragon napping was not as easy as it sounded, 

210 



INSIDE INFORMATION 

and the attempt to stick one or prod one asleep was more 
likely to end in disaster than a bold frontal attack. All 
the while they talked the thrush listened, till at last when 
the stars began to peep forth, it silently spread its wings 
and flew away. And all the while they talked and the 
shadows lengthened Bilbo became more and more un¬ 
happy and his foreboding grew. 

At last he interrupted them. ‘I am sure we are very 
unsafe here,* he said, ‘and 1 don t see the point of sitting 
here. The dragon has withered all the pleasant green, 
and anyway the night has come and it is cold. But I feel it 
in my bones that this place will be attacked again. Smaug 
knows now how I came down to his hall, and you can 
trust him to guess where the other end of the tunnel is. 
He will break all this side of the Mountain to bits, if 
necessary, to stop up our entrance, and if we are smashed 
with it the better he will like it.* 

‘You are very gloomy, Mr. Baggins! * said Thorin. *Why 
has not Smaug blocked the lower end, then, if he is so 
eager to keep us out? He has not, or we should have 
heard him.* 

‘I don*t know, I don’t know - because at first he 
wanted to try and lure me in again, I suppose, and now 
perhaps because he is waiting till after tonight’s hunt, or 
because he does not want to damage his bedroom if he 
can help it - but I wish you would not argue. Smaug will 
be coming out at any minute now% and our only hope is 
to get well in the tunnel and shut the door.* 

He seemed so much in earnest that the dwarves at last 
did as he said, though they delayed shutting the door - it 
seemed a desperate plan, for no one knew whether or how 
they could get it open again from the inside, and the 
thought of being shut in a place from which the only way 
out led through the dragon’s lair was not one they liked. 
Also everything seemed quite quiet, both outside and 
down the tunnel. So for a longish while they sat inside 
not far down from the half-open door and went on talking. 

ail 



THE HOBBIT 


The talk turned to the dragon’s wicked words about 
the dwarves. Bilbo wished he had never heard them, or at 
least that he could feel quite certain that the dwarves 
now were absolutely honest when they declared that they 
had never thought at all about what would happen after 
the treasure had been won. ‘We knew it would be a des¬ 
perate venture,’ said Thorin, ‘and we know that still; and 
I still think that when we have won it will be time 
enough to think what to do about it. As for your share, 
Mr. Baggins, I assure you we are more than grateful and 
you shall choose your own fourteenth, as soon as we have 
anything to divide. I am sorry if you are worried about 
transport, and I admit the difficulties are great - the 
lands have not become less wild with the passing of time, 
rather the reverse - but we will do whatever we can for 
you, and take our share of the cost when the time comes. 
Believe me or not as you like 1 * 

From that the talk turned to the great hoard itself and 
to the things that Thorin and Balin remembered. They 
wondered if they were still lying there unharmed in the 
hall below: the spears that were made for the armies of 
the great King Bladorthfti (long since dead), each had a 
thrice-forged head and their shafts were inlaid with cun¬ 
ning gold, but they were never delivered or paid for; 
shields made for warriors long dead; the great golden cup 
of Thror, two-handed, hammered and carven with birds 
and flowers whose eyes and petals were of jewels; coats of 
mail gilded and silvered and impenetrable; the necklace 
of Girion, Lord of Dale, made of five hundred emeralds 
green as grass, which he gave for the arming of his eldest 
son in a coat of dwarf-linked rings the like of which had 
never been made before, for it was wrought of pure silver 
to the power and strength of triple steel. But fairest of all 
was the great white gem, which the dwarves had found 
beneath the roots of the Mountain, the Heart of the 
Mountain, the Arkenstone of Thrain. 

‘The Arkenstone I The Arkenstone I* murmured 
212 



INSIDE INFORMATION 

Thorin in the dark, half dreaming with his chin upon his 
knees. ‘It was like a globe with a thousand facets; it shone 
like silver in the firelight, like water in the sun, like snow 
under the stars, like rain upon the Moon!’ 

But the enchanted desire of the hoard had fallen from 
Bilbo. All through their talk he vas only half listening to 
them. He sat nearest to the dooi with one ear cocked for 
any beginnings of a sound without, his other was alert for 
echoes beyond the murmurs or the dwarves, for any 
whisper of a movement from far below. 

Darkness grew deeper and he grew even more uneasy. 
‘Shut the door! ’ he begged them, ‘I fear that dragon in 
my marrow. I like this silence far less than the uproar of 
last night. Shut the door before it is too late I’ 

Something in his voice gave the dwarves an uncomfort¬ 
able feeling. Slowly 7'horin shook off his dreams and get¬ 
ting up he kicked away the stone that wedged the door. 
Then they thrust upon it, and it closed with a snap and a 
clang. No trace of a keyhole was there left on the inside. 
They were shut in the Mountain! 

And not a moment too soon. They had hardly gone 
any distance down the tunnel when a blow smote the side 
of the Mountain like the crash of battering-rams made of 
forest oaks and swung by giants. The rock boomed, the 
walls cracked and stones fell from the roof on their heads. 
What would have happened if the door had still been open 
I don’t like to think. They fled further down the tunnel 
glad to be still alive, while behind them outside they 
heard the roar and rumble of Smaug's fury. He was 
breaking rocks to pieces, smashing wall and cliff with the 
lashings of his huge tail, till their little lofty camping 
ground, the scorched grass, the thrush’s stone, the snail- 
covered walls, the narrow ledge, and all disappeared in a 
jumble of smithereens, and an avalanche of splintered 
stones fell over the cliff into the valley below. 

Smaug had left his lair in silent stealth, quietly soared 
into the air, and then floated heavy and slow in the dark 



THE HOBBIT 


like a monstrous crow, down the wind towards the west of 
the Mountain, in the hopes of catching unawares some¬ 
thing or somebody there, and of spying the outlet to the 
passage which the thief had used. This was the outburst 
of his wrath when he could find nobody and see nothing, 
even where he guessed the outlet must actually be. 

After he had let off his rage in this way he felt better 
and he thought in his heart that he would not be 
troubled again from that direction. In the meanwhile he 
had further vengeance to take. ‘Barrel-rider! * he snorted. 
‘Your feet came from the waterside and up the water you 
came without a doubt. I don't know your smell, but if 
you are not one of those men of the Lake, you had their 
help. They shall see me and remember who is the real 
King under the Mountain!' 

He rose in fire and went away south towards the Run¬ 
ning River. 


13 Not at home 

In the meanwhile, the dwarves sat in darkness, and utter 
silence fell about them. Little they ate and little they 
spoke. They could not count the passing of time; and 
they scarcely dared to move, for the whisper of their 
voices echoed and rustled in the tunnel. If they dozed, 
they woke still to darkness and to silence going on un¬ 
broken. At last after days and days of waiting, as it 
seemed, when they were becoming choked and dazed for 
want of air, they could bear it no longer. They would 
almost have welcomed sounds from below of the dragon's 
return. In the silence they feared some cunning devilry of 
his, but they could not sit there for ever. 

Thorin spoke: ‘Let us try the door!' he said. ‘I must 
214 



NOT AT HOME 


feel the wind on my face soon or die. I think I would 
rather be smashed by Smaug in the open than suffocate 
in here!’ So several of the dwarves got up and groped 
back to where the door had been. But they found that the 
upper end of the tunnel had bet n shattered and blocked 
with broken rock. Neither key nor the magic it had once 
obeyed would ever open that d(‘or again. 

‘We are trapped! ’ they groaned. ‘This is the end. We 
shall die here.* 

But somehow, just when the dwarves were most 
despairing, Bilbo felt a strange lightening of the heart, as 
if a heavy weight had gone from under his waistcoat. 

‘Come, come! ’ he said. ‘ “While there’s life there’s 
hope!’’ as my father used to say, and “Third time pays 
for all.’’ I am going down the tunnel once again. I have 
been that way twice, when I knew there was a dragon at 
the other end, so I will risk a third visit when I am no 
longer sure. Anyway the only way out is down. And I 
think this time you had better all come with me.’ 

In desperation they agreed, and Thorin was the first to 
go forward by Bilbo’s side. 

‘Now do be careful! ’ whispered the hobbit, ‘and as 
quiet as you can be! There may be no Smaug at the 
bottom, but then again there may be. Don’t let us take 
any unnecessary risks! ’ 

Down, down they went. The dwarves could not, of 
course, compare with the hobbit in real stealth, and they 
made a deal of puffing and shuffling which echoes magni¬ 
fied alarmingly; but though every now and again Bilbo 
in fear stopped and listened, not a sound stirred below. 
Near the bottom, as well as he could judge. Bilbo slipped 
on his ring and went ahead. But he did not need it: the 
darkness was complete, and they were all invisible, ring 
or no ring. In fact so black was it that the hobbit came to 
the opening unexpectedly, put his hand on air, stumbled 
forward, and rolled headlong into the hall 1 

There he lay face downwards on the floor and did not 



THE HOBBIT 


dare to get up, or hardly even to breathe. But nothing 
moved. There was not a gleam of light - unless, as it 
seemed to him, when at last he slowly raised his head, 
there was a pale white glint, above him and far off in the 
gloom. But certainly it was not a spark of dragon-fire, 
though the worm-stench was heavy in the place, and the 
taste of vapour was on his tongue. 

At length Mr. Baggins could bear it no longer. ‘Con¬ 
found you, Smaug, you worm!* he squeaked aloud. ‘Stop 
playing hide-and-seek! Give me a light, and then eat me, 
if you can catch rne! ’ 

Faint echoes ran round the unseen hall, but there was 
no answer. 

Bilbo got up, and found that he did not know in what 
direction to turn. 

‘Now I wonder what on earth Smaug is playing at,’ he 
said. ‘He is not at home today (or tonight, or whatever it 
is), I do believe. If Oin and Gloin have not lost their 
tinder-boxes, perhaps we can make a little light, and have 
a look round before the luck turns.’ 

‘Light!’ he cried. ‘Can anybody make a light?’ 

The dwarves, of course, were very alarmed when Bilbo 
fell forward down the step with a bump into the hall, 
and they sat huddled just where he had left them at the 
end of the tunnel. 

‘Sh! Shi' they hissed, when they heard his voice; and 
though that helped the hobbit to find out where they 
were, it was some time before he could get anything else 
out of them. Brut in the end, whert Bilbo actually began 
to stamp on the floor, and screamed out ‘light! ’ at the top 
of his shrill voice, Thorin gave way, and Oin and Gloin 
were sent back to their bundles at the top of the tunnel. 

After a while a twinkling gleam showed them return¬ 
ing, Oin with a small pine-torch alight in his hand, and 
Gloin with a bundle of others under his arm. Quickly 
Bilbo trotted to the door and took the torch; but he 

ai6 



NOT AT HOME 


could not persuade the dwarves to light the others or to 
come and join him yet. As Thorin carefully explained, 
Mr. Baggins was still officially their expert burglar and 
investigator. If he liked to risk a light, that was his affair. 
They would wait in the tunnel for his report. So they sat 
near the door and watched. 

They saw the little dark shape of the hobbit start across 
the floor holding his tiny lighi aloft. Every now and 
again, while he was still near enough, they caught a glint 
and a tinkle as he stumbled on some golden thing. The 
light grew smaller as he wandered away into the vast 
hall; then it began to rise dancing into the air. Bilbo was 
climbing the great mound of treasure. Soon he stood 
upon the top, and still went on. Then they saw him halt 
and stoop for a moment; but they did not know the 
reason. 

It was the Arkenstone, the Heart of the Mountain. So 
Bilbo guessed from Thorin’s description; but indeed 
there could not be two such gems, even in so marvellous a 
hoard, even in all the world. Ever as he climbed, the same 
white gleam had shone before him and drawn his feet 
towards it. Slowly it grew to a little globe of pallid light. 
Now as he came near, it was tinged with a flickering 
sparkle of many colours at the surface, reflected and 
splintered from the wavering light of his torch. At last he 
looked down upon it, and he caught his breath. The 
great jewel shone before his feet of its own inner light, 
and yet, cut and fashioned by the dwarves, who had dug 
it from the heart of the mountain long ago, it took all 
light that fell upon it and changed it into ten thousand 
sparks of white radiance shot with glints of the rainbow. 

Suddenly Bilbo’s arm went towards it drawn by its en¬ 
chantment. His small hand would not close about it, for 
it was a large and heavy gem; but he lifted it, shut his 
eyes, and put it in his deepest pocket. 

‘Now I am a burglar indeed!’ thought he. ‘But I sup¬ 
pose I must tell the dwarves about it - some time. They 

«17 



THE HOBBIT 


did say I could pick and choose my own share; and I 
think I would choose this, if they took all the rest!' All 
the same he had an uncomfortable feeling that the pick 
ing and choosing had not really been meant to include 
this marvellous gem, and that trouble would yet come of 
it. 

Now he went on again. Down the other side of the 
great mound he climbed, and the spark of his torch van¬ 
ished from the sight of the watching dwarves. But soon 
they saw it far away in the distance again. Bilbo was 
crossing the floor of the hall. 

He went on, until he came to the great doors at the 
further side, and there a draught of air refreshed him, 
but it almost puffed out his light. He peeped timidly 
through, and caught a glimpse of great passages and of 
the dim beginnings of wide stairs going up into the 
gloom. And still there was no sight or sound of Smaug. 
He was just going to turn and go back, when a black 
shape swooped at him, and brushed his face. He squeaked 
and started, stumbled backwards and fell. His torch 
dropped head downwards and went out! 

‘Only a bat, I suppose and hope!' he said miserably. 
‘But now what am I to do? Which is East, South, North, 
or West?' 

‘ThorinI Balin! Oin! Gloin! Fili ! Kili!'he cried as 
loud as he could - it seemed a thin little noise in the wide 
blackness. ‘The light’s gone out! Someone come and find 
me and help me I' For the moment his courage had failed 
altogether. 

Faintly the dwarves heard his small cries, though the 
only word they could catch was ‘help! * 

‘Now what on earth or under it has happened?' said 
Thorin. ‘Certainly not the dragon, or he would not go on 
squeaking.' 

They waited a moment or two, and still there were no 
dragon-noises, no sound at all in fact but Bilbo's distant 
voice. ‘Come, one of you, get another light or two!' 

ai8 



NOT AT HOME 


Thorin ordered. ‘It seems we have got to go and help our 
burglar.' 

‘It is about our turn to help/ said Balin, ‘and I am 
quite willing to go. Anyway I expect it is safe for the 
moment.’ 

Gloin lit several more torches, and then they all crept 
out, one by one, and went along the wall as hurriedly as 
they could. It was not long befon they met Bilbo himself 
coming back towards them. His wits had quickly re¬ 
turned as soon as he saw the twinkle of their lights. 

‘Only a bat and a dropped torch, nothing worse 1 * he 
said in answer to their questions. Though they were 
much relieved, they were inclined to be grumpy at being 
frightened for nothing; but what they would have said, if 
he had told them at that moment about the Arkenstone, 
I don’t know. The mere fleeting glimpse of treasure 
which they had caught as they went along had rekindled 
all the fire of their dwarvish hearts; and when the heart 
of a dwarf, even the most respectable, is wakened by gold 
and by jewels, he grows suddenly bold, and he may be¬ 
come fierce. 

The dwarves indeed no longer needed any urging. All 
were now eager to explore the hall while they had the 
chance, and willing to believe that, for the present, 
Smaug was away from home. Each now gripped a lighted 
torch; and as they gazed, first on one side and then on 
another, they forgot fear and even caution. They spoke 
aloud, and cried out to one another, as they lifted old 
treasures from the mound or from the wall and held 
them in the light, caressing and fingering them. 

Fili and Kili were almost in merry mood, and finding 
still hanging there many golden harps strung with silver 
they took them and struck them; and being magical (and 
also untouched by the dragon, who had small interest in 
niusic) they were still in tune. The dark hall was filled 
'vith a melody that had long been silent. But most of the 
dwarves were more practical: they, gathered gems and 

«i9 



THE HOBBIT 


Stuffed their pockets, and let what they could not carry 
fall back through their fingers with a sigh. Thorin was 
not least among these; but always he searched from side 
to side for something which he could not find. It was the 
Arkenstone; but he spoke of it yet to no one. 

Now the dwarves took down mail and weapons from 
the walls and armed themselves. Royal indeed did Thor¬ 
in look, clad in a coat of gold-plated rings, with a silver- 
hafted axe in a belt crusted with scarlet stones. 

‘Mr. Baggins!* he cried. ‘Here is the first payment of 
your reward! Cast off your old coat and put on this!' 

With that he put on Bilbo a small coat of mail, 
wrought for some young elf-prince long ago. It was of 
silver-steel, which the elves call mithril, and with it went 
a belt of pearls and crystals. A light helm of figured 
leather, strengthened beneath with hoops of steel, and 
studded about the brim with white gems, was set upon 
the hobbit’s head. 

‘I feel magnificent,’ he thought; ‘but I expect I look 
rather absurd. How they would laugh on the Hill at 
home! Still I wish there was a looking-glass handy! ’ 

All the same Mr. Baggins kept his head more clear of 
the bewitchment of the hoard than the dwarves did. 
Long before the dwarves were tired of examining the 
treasures, he became weary of it and sat down on the 
floor; and he began to wonder nervously what the end of 
it all would be. ‘I would give a good many of these 
precious goblets,’ he thought, ‘for a drink of something 
cheering out of one of Beorn’s wooden bowls! ’ 

‘ThorinI’ he cried aloud. ‘What next? We are armed, 
but what good has any armour ever been before against 
Smaug the Dreadful? This treasure is not yet won back. 
We are not looking for gold yet, but for a way of escape; 
and we have tempted luck too long!’ 

‘You speak the truth! ’ answered Thorin, recovering his 
wits. ‘Let us go! 1 will guide you. Not in a thousand years 
should 1 forget the ways of this palace.’ Then he hailed 

9StO 



NOT AT HOME 


the Others, and they gathered toge ther, and holding their 
torches above their heads they passed through the gaping 
doors, not without many a backward glance of longing. 

Their glittering mail they had (overed again with their 
old cloaks and their bright helms with their tattered 
hoods, and one by one they walkeil behind Thorin, a line 
of little lights in the darkness that halted often, listening 
in fear once more for any rumour of the dragon^s coming. 
Though all the old adornments were long mouldered 
or destroyed, and though all was befouled and blasted 
with the comings and goings of the monster, Thorin 
knew every passage and every turn. They climbed long 
stairs, and turned and went down wide echoing ways, and 
turned again and climbed yet more stairs, and yet more 
stairs again. These were smooth, cut out of the living rock 
broad and fair; and up, up, the dwarves went, and they 
met no sign of any living thing, only furtive shadows that 
fled from the approach of their torches fluttering in the 
draughts. 

The steps were not made, all the same, for hobbit-legs, 
and Bilbo was just feeling that he could go on no longer, 
when suddenly the roof sprang high and far beyond the 
reach of their torch-light. A white glimmer could be seen 
coming through some opening far above, and the air 
smelt sweeter. Before them light came dimly through 
great doors, that hung twisted on their hinges and half 
burnt. 

‘This is the great chamber of Thror,’ said Thorin; ‘the 
hall of feasting and of council. Not far off now is the 
Front Gate.’ 

They passed through the ruined chamber. Tables were 
rotting there; chairs and benches were lying there over¬ 
turned, charred and decaying. Skulls and bones were 
upon the floor among flagons and bowls and broken 
drinking-horns and dust. As they came through yet more 
doors at the further end, a sound of water fell upon their 
ears, and the grey light grew suddenly more full. 



THE HOBBIT 


‘There is the birth of the Running River/ said Thorin. 
‘From here it hastens to the Gate. Let us follow it!' 

Out of a dark opening in a wall of rock there issued a 
boiling water, and it flowed swirling in a narrow channel, 
carved and made straight and deep by the cunning of 
ancient hands. Beside it ran a stone-paved road, wide 
enough for many men abreast. Swiftly along this they 
ran, and round a wide-sweeping turn -- and behold! 
Before them stood the broad light of day. In front there 
rose a tall arch, still showing the fragments of old carven 
work within, worn and splintered and blackened though 
it was. A misty sun sent its pale light between the arms of 
the Mountain, and beams of gold fell on the pavement at 
the threshold. 

A whirl of bats frightened from slumber by their smok¬ 
ing torches flurried over them; as they sprang forward 
their feet slithered on stones rubbed smooth and slimed 
by the passing of the dragon. Now before them the water 
fell noisily outward and foamed down towards the valley. 
They flung their pale torches to the ground, and stood 
gazing out with dazzled eyes. They were come to the 
Front Gate, and were looking out upon Dale. 

‘Well!' said Bilbo, ‘I never expected to be looking out 
of this door. And I never expected to be so pleased to see 
the sun again, and to feel the wind on my face. But, ow I 
This wind is cold! ’ 

It was. A bitter easterly breeze blew with a threat of 
oncoming winter. It swirled over and round the arms of 
the Mountain into the valley, and sighed among the 
rocks. After their long time in the stewing depths of the 
dragon-haunted caverns, they shivered in the sun. 

Suddenly Bilbo realized that he was not only tired but 
also very hungry indeed. ‘It seems to be late morning,* he 
said, ‘and so I suppose it is more or less breakfast time - if 
there is any breakfast to have. But I don't feel that 
Smaug's front doorstep is the safest place for a meal. Do 
let's go somewhere where we can sit quiet for a bit!' 

aaa 



NOT AT HOME 


‘Quite right I ‘ said Balin. ‘And I think I know which 
way we should go: we ought to make for the old look-out 
post at the South-West corner of ihe Mountain/ 

‘How far is that?* asked the hobbit. 

‘Five hours march, I should think. It will be rough 
going. The road from the Gate aL >ng the left edge of the 
stream seems all broken up. But look down there I The 
river loops suddenly east across Dale in front of the 
ruined town. At that point there was once a bridge, lead¬ 
ing to steep stairs that climbed up the right bank, and so 
to a road running towards Ravenhill. There is (or was) a 
path that left the road and climbed up to the post. A 
hard climb, too, even if the old steps are still there.* 
‘Dear me!* grumbled the hobbit. ‘More walking and 
more climbing without breakfast! I wonder how many 
breakfasts, and other meals, we have missed inside that 
nasty clockless, timeless hole?* 

As a matter of fact two nights and the day between had 
gone by (and not altogether without food) since the 
dragon smashed the magic door, but Bilbo had quite lost 
count, and it might have been one night or a week of 
nights for all he could tell. 

‘Come, come! * said Thorin laughing - his spirits had 
begun to rise again, and he rattled the precious stones in 
his pockets. ‘Don*t call my palace a nasty hole! You wait 
till it has been cleaned and redecorated! * 

‘That won*t be till Smaug*s dead,* said Bilbo glumly. 
‘In the meanwhile where is he? I would give a good 
breakfast to know. I hope he is not up on the Mountain 
looking down at us! * 

That idea disturbed the dwarves mightily, and they 
quickly decided that Bilbo and Balin were right. 

‘We must move away from here,* said Dori. ‘I feel as if 
his eyes were on the back of my head.* 

‘It*s a cold lonesome place,* said Bombur. ‘There may 
be drink, but I see no sign of food. A dragon would 
always be hungry in such parts.’ 



. THE HOBBIT 

‘Come on! Come on! * cried the others. ‘Let us follow 
Balin*s path! ’ 

Under the rocky wall to the right there was no path, so 
on they trudged among the stones on the left side of the 
river, and the emptiness and desolation soon sobered 
even Thorin again. The bridge that Balin had spoken of 
they found long fallen, and most of its stones were now 
only boulders in the shallow noisy stream: but they 
forded the water without much difficulty, and found the 
ancient steps, and climbed the high bank. After going a 
short w^ay they struck the old road, and before long came 
to a deep dell sheltered among the rocks; there they 
rested for a while and had such a breakfast as they could, 
chiefly cram and water. (If you want to know what cram 
is, I can only say that I don't know the recipe; but it is 
biscuitish, keeps good indefinitely, is supposed to be sus¬ 
taining, and is certainly not entertaining, being in fact 
very uninteresting except as a chewing exercise. It was 
made by the Lake-men for long journeys). 

After that they went on again; and now the road 
struck westwards and left the river, and the great shoul¬ 
der of the south-pointing mountain-spur drew ever 
nearer. At length they reached the hill path. It scrambled 
steeply up, and they plodded slowly one behind the 
other, till at last in the late afternoon they came to the 
top of the ridge and saw the wintry sun going downwards 
to the West. 

Here they found a flat place without a wall on three 
sides, but backed to the North by a rocky face in which 
there was an opening like a door. From that door there 
was a wide view East and South and West. 

‘Here,' said Balin, ‘in the old days we used always to 
keep watchmen, and that door behind leads into a rock- 
hewn chamber that was made here as a guardroom. 
There were several places like it round the Mountain. 
But there seemed small need for watching in the days of 

aa4 



FIRE AND WATER 


our prosperity, and the guards W(Te made over comfort¬ 
able, perhaps - otherwise we might have had longer 
warning of the coming of the dr.igon, and things might 
have been different. Still, here we c m now lie hid and shel¬ 
tered for a while, and can see muc h without being seen.' 

‘Not much use, if we have been seen coming here,’ said 
Dori, who was always looking up irowards the Mountain’s 
peak, as if he expected to see Smaug perched there like a 
bird on a steeple. 

‘We must take our chance of that,’ said Thorin. ‘We 
can go no further today.’ 

‘Hear, hear! ’ cried Bilbo, and flung himself on the 
ground. 

In the rock-chamber there would have been room for a 
hundred, and there was a small chamber further in, more 
removed from the cold outside. It was quite deserted; not 
even wild animals seemed to have used it in all the days 
of Smaug’s dominion. There they laid their burdens; and 
some threw themselves down at once and slept, but the 
others sat near the outer door and discussed their plans. 
In all their talk they came perpetually back to one thing: 
where was Smaug? They looked West and there was 
nothing, and East there was nothing, and in the South 
there was no sign of the dragon, but there was a gather¬ 
ing of very many birds. At that they gazed and wondered; 
but they were no nearer understanding it, when the first 
cold stars came out. 


14 Fire and water 

Now if you wish, like the dwarves, to hear news of Smaug, 
you must go back again to the evening when he smashed 
the door and flew off in rage, two days before. 

M5 



THE HOBBIT 


The men of the Lake-town Esgaroth were mostly in¬ 
doors, for the breeze was from the black East and chill, 
but a few were walking on the quays, and watching, as 
they were fond of doing, the stars shine out from the 
smooth patches of the lake as they opened in the sky. 
From their town the Lonely Mountain was mostly 
screened by the low hills at the far end of the lake, 
through a gap in which the Running River came down 
from the North. Only its high peak could they see in clear 
weather, and they looked seldom at it, for it was ominous 
and drear even in the light of morning. Now it was lost 
and gone, blotted in the dark. 

Suddenly it flickered back to view; a brief glow touched 
it and faded. 

‘Look!* said one. ‘The lights again! Last night the 
watchmen saw them start and fade from midnight until 
dawn. Something is happening up there.* 

‘Perhaps the King under the Mountain is forging gold,’ 
said another. It is long since he went north. It is time the 
songs began to prove themselves again.* 

‘Which king?* said another with a grim voice. ‘As like 
as not it is the marauding fire of the Dragon, the only 
king under the Mountain we have ever known.* 

‘You are always foreboding gloomy things!* said the 
others. ‘Anything from floods to poisoned fish. Think of 
something cheerful! * 

Then suddenly a great light appeared in the low place 
in the hills and the northern end of the lake turned 
golden. ‘The King beneath the Mountain! * they shouted. 
‘His wealth is like the Sun, his silver like a fountain, his 
rivers golden run! The river is running gold from the 
Mountain!* they cried, and everywhere windows were 
opening and feet were hurrying. 

There was once more a tremendous excitement and 
enthusiasm. But the grim-voiced fellow ran hotfoot to the 
Master. ‘The dragon is coming or I am a fool! * he aied. 
‘Cut the bridges! To arms! To arms!’ 

m6 



FIRE AND WATER 


Then warning trumpets were suddenly sounded, and 
echoed along the rocky shores. 1 he cheering stopped and 
the joy was turned to dread. So it was that the dragon did 
not find them quite unprepared. 

Before long, so great was his speed, they could see him 
as a spark of fire rushing toward s them and growing ever 
huger and more bright, and not the most foolish doubted 
that the prophecies had gone rather wrong. Still they had 
a little time. Every vessel in the town was filled with 
water, every warrior was armed, every arrow and dart was 
ready, and the bridge to the land was thrown down and 
destroyed, before the roar of Smaug*s terrible approach 
grew loud, and the lake rippled red as fire beneath the 
awful beating of his wings. 

Amid shrieks and shouts of men he came over them, 
swept towards the bridges and was foiled! The bridge 
was gone, and his enemies were on an island in deep 
water - too deep and dark and cool for his liking. If he 
plunged into it, a vapour and a steam would arise 
enough to cover all the land with a mist for days; but the 
lake was mightier than he, it would quench him before 
he could pass through. 

Roaring he swept back over the town. A hail of dark 
arrows leaped up and snapped and rattled on his scales 
and jewels, and their sh^ts fell back kindled by his 
breath burning and hissing into the lake. No fireworks 
you ever imagined equalled the sights that night. At the 
twanging of the bows and the shrilling of the trumpets 
the dragon’s wrath blazed to its height, till he was blind 
and mad with it. No one had dared to give battle to him 
for many an age; nor would they have dared now, if it 
had not been for the grim-voiced man (Bard was his 
name), who ran to and fro cheering on the archers and 
urging the Master to order them to fight to the last arrow. 

Fire leaped from the dragon’s jaws. He circled for a 
while high in the air above them, lighting all the lake; the 
trees by the shores shone like copper and like blood with 

2*7 



THE HOBBIT 


leaping shadows of dense black at their feet. Then down 
he swooped straight through the arrow-storm, reckless in 
his rage, taking no heed to turn his scaly sides towards his 
foes, seeking only to set their town ablaze. 

Fire leaped from thatched roofs and wooden beam- 
ends as he hurtled down and past and round again, 
though all had been drenched with water before he came. 
Once more water was flung by a hundred hands wherever 
a spark appeared. Back swirled the dragon. A sweep of his 
tail and the roof of the Great House crumbled and 
smashed down. Flames unquenchable sprang high into 
the night. Another swoop and another, and another 
house and then another sprang afire and fell; and still no 
arrow hindered Smaug or hurt him more than a fly from 
the marshes. 

Already men were jumping into the water on every 
side. Women and children were being huddled into 
laden boats in the market-pool. Weapons were flung 
down. There was mourning and weeping, where but a 
little time ago the old songs of mirth to come had been 
sung about the dwarves. Now men cursed their names. 
The Master himself was turning to his great gilded boat, 
hoping to row away in the confusion and save himself. 
Soon all the town would be deserted and burned down to 
the surface of the lake. 

That was the dragon’s hope. They could all get into 
boats for all he cared. There he could have fine sport 
hunting them, or they could stop till they starved. Let 
them try to get to land and he would be ready. Soon he 
would set all the shoreland woods ablaze and wither 
every field and pasture. Just now he was enjoying the 
sport of town-baiting more than he had enjoyed anything 
for years. 

But there was still a company of archers that held their 
ground among the burning houses. Their captain was 
Bard, grim-voiced and grim-faced, whose friends had 

22S 



FIRE AND WATER 


accused him of prophesying floods and poisoned fish, 
though they knew his worth and courage. He was a de¬ 
scendant in long line of Girion, lord of Dale, whose wife 
and child had escaped down the R unning River from the 
ruin long ago. Now he shot with i great yew bow, till all 
his arrows but one were spent. The flames were near him. 
His companions were leaving him. He bent his bow for 
the last time. 

Suddenly out of the dark something fluttered to his 
shoulder. He started - but it was only an old thrush. 
Unafraid it perched by his ear and brought him news. 
Marvelling he found he could understand its tongue, for 
he was of the race of Dale. 

‘Wait! Wait! ’ it said to him. ‘The moon is rising. Look 
for the hollow of the left breast as he flies and turns above 
you! * And while Bard paused in wonder it told him of 
tidings up in the Mountain and of all that it had heard. 

Then Bard drew his bow-string to his ear. The dragon 
was circling back, flying low, and as he came the moon 
rose above the eastern shore and silvered his great wings. 

‘Arrow! ‘ said the bowman. ‘Black arrow! I have saved 
you to the last. You have never failed me and always I 
have recovered you. I had you from my father and he 
from of old. If ever you came from the forges of the true 
king under the Mountain, go now and speed well!' 

The dragon swooped once more lower than ever, and 
as he turned and dived down his belly glittered white 
with sparkling fires of gems in the moon - but not in one 
place. The great bow twanged. The black arrow sped 
straight from the string, straight for the hollow by the left 
breast where the foreleg was flung wide. In it smote and 
vanished, barb, shaft and feather, so fierce was its flight. 
With a shriek that deafened men, felled trees and split 
stone, Smaug shot spouting into the air, turned over and 
crashed down from on high in ruin. 

Full on the town he fell. His last throes splintered it to 
sparks and gledes. The lake roared in. A vast steam 

t«9 



THE HOBBIT 


leaped up, white in the sudden dark under the moon. 
There was a hiss, a gushing whirl, and then silence. And 
that was the end of Smaug and Esgaroth, but not of Bard. 

The waxing moon rose higher and higher and the 
wind grew loud and cold. It twisted the white fog into 
bending pillars and hurrying clouds and drove it off to 
the West to scatter in tattered shreds over the marshes 
before Mirk wood. Then the many boats could be seen 
dotted dark on the surface of the lake, and down the 
wind came the voices of the people of Esgaroth lamenting 
their lost town and goods and ruined houses. But they 
had really much to be thankful for, had they thought of 
it, though it could hardly be expected that they should 
just then: three quarters of the people of the town had at 
least escaped alive; their woods and fields and pastures 
and cattle and most of their boats remained undamaged; 
and the dragon was dead. What that meant they had not 
yet realized. 

They gathered in mournful crowds upon the western 
shores, shivering in the cold wind, and their first com¬ 
plaints and anger were against the Master, who had left 
the town so soon, while some were still willing to defend 
it. 

‘He may have a good head for business - especially his 
own business,' some murmured, ‘but he is no good when 
anything serious happens! * And they praised the courage 
of Bard and his last mighty shot. *lf only he had not been 
killed,’ they all said, ‘we would make him a king. Bard the 
Dragon-shooter of the line of Girion I Alas that he is lost I' 

And in the very midst of their talk a tall figure stepped 
from the shadows. He was drenched with water, his black 
hair hung wet over his face and shoulders, and a fierce 
light was in his eyes. 

‘Bard is not lost!’ he cried. 'He dived from Esgaroth, 
when the enemy was slain. I am Bard, of the line of 
Girion; I am the slayer of the dragon! ’ 



FIRE AND W\TER 


‘King Bard! King Bard! * they shouted; but the Master 
ground his chattering teeth. 

‘Girion was lord of Dale, not king of Esgaroth,* he said. 
‘In the Lake-town we have alw;iys elected masters from 
among the old and wise, and hsve not endured the rule 
of mere fighting men. Let “Kiiig Bard” go back to his 
own kingdom - Dale is now fieed by his valour, and 
nothing hinders his return. And any that wish can go 
with him, if they prefer the cold stones under the shadow 
of the Mountain to the green shores of the lake. The wise 
will stay here and hope to rebuild our town, and enjoy 
again in time its peace and riches.’ 

‘We will have King Bard!’ the people near at hand 
shouted in reply. ‘We have had enough of the old men 
and the money-counters! * And people further off took up 
the cry: ‘Up the Bowman, and down with Moneybags,’ 
till the clamour echoed along the shore. 

‘I am the last man to undervalue Bard the Bowman,* 
said the Master warily (for Bard now stood close beside 
him). ‘He has tonight earned an eminent place in the roll 
of the benefactors of our town; and he is worthy of many 
imperishable songs. But why, O People?’ - and here the 
Master rose to his feet and spoke very loud and clear - 
‘why do I get all your blame? For what fault am I to be 
deposed? Who aroused the dragon from his slumber, I 
might ask? Who obtained of us rich gifts and ample help, 
and led us to believe that old songs could come true? 
Who played on our soft hearts and our pleasant fancies? 
What sort of gold have they sent down the river to re¬ 
ward us? Dragon-fire and ruin! From whom should we 
claim the recompense of our damage, and aid for our 
widows and orphans?* 

As you see, the Master had not got his position for 
nothing. The result of his words was that for the moment 
the people quite forgot their idea of a new king, and 
turned their angry thoughts towards Thorin and his 
company. Wild and bitter words were shouted from 

2$i 



THE HOBBIT 


many sides; and some of those who had before sung the 
old songs loudest, were now heard as loudly crying that 
the dwarves had stirred the dragon up against them 
deliberately! 

Tools!’ said Bard. ‘Why waste words and wrath on 
those unhappy creatures? Doubtless they perished first in 
fire, before Sraaug came to us.’ Then even as he was 
speaking, the thought came into his heart of the fabled 
treasure of the Mountain lying without guard or owner, 
and he fell suddenly silent. He thought of the Master’s 
words, and of Dale rebuilt, and filled with golden bells, if 
he could but find the men. 

At length he spoke again: ‘This is no time for angry 
words. Master, or for considering weighty plans of 
change. There is work to do. I serve you still - though 
after a while I may think again of your words and go 
North with any that will follow me.’ 

Then he strode off to help in the ordering of the camps 
and in the care of the sick and the wounded. But the 
Master scowled at his back as he went, and remained sit¬ 
ting on the ground. He thought much but said little, un¬ 
less it was to call loudly for men to bring him fire and 
food. 

Now everywhere Bard went he found talk running like 
fire among the people concerning the vast treasure that 
was now unguarded. Men spoke of the recompense for all 
their harm that they would soon get from it, and wealth 
over and to spare with which to buy rich things from the 
South; and it cheered them greatly in their plight. That 
was as well, for the night was bitter and miserable. 
Shelters could be contrived for few (the Master had one) 
and there was little food (even the Master went short). 
Many took ill of wet and cold and sorrow that night, and 
afterwards died, who had escaped uninjured from the 
ruin of the town; and in the days that followed there was 
much sickness and great hunger. 

Meanwhile Bard took the lead, and ordered things as 



FIRE AND WKTER 


he wished, though always in the Master’s name, and he 
had a hard task to govern th<* people and direct the 
preparations for their protection and housing. Probably 
most of them would have perished in the winter that now 
hurried after autumn, if help had not been to hand. But 
help came swiftly; for Bard ai once had speedy mes¬ 
sengers sent up the river to the forest to ask the aid of the 
King of the Elves of the Wood, and these messengers had 
found a host already on the move, although it was then 
only the third day after the fall of Smaug. 

The Elvenking had received news from his own mes¬ 
sengers and from the birds that loved his folk, and 
already knew much of what had happened. Very great 
indeed was the commotion among all things with wings 
that dwelt on the borders of the Desolation of the 
Dragon. The air was filled with circling flocks, and their 
swift-flying messengers flew here and there across the sky. 
Above the borders of the Forest there was whistling, cry¬ 
ing and piping. Far over Mirkwood tidings spread: 
‘Smaug is dead! ’ Leaves rustled and startled ears were 
lifted. Even before the Elvenking rode forth the news had 
passed west right to the pinewoods of the Misty Moun¬ 
tains; Beorn had heard it in his wooden house, and the 
goblins were at council in their caves. 

‘That will be the last we shall hear of Thorin Oaken- 
shield, I fear,* said the king. ‘He would have done better 
to have remained my guest. It is an ill wind, all the same,* 
he added, ‘that blows no one any good.’ For he too had 
not forgotten the legend of the wealth of Thror. So it was 
that Bard’s messengers found him now marching with 
many spearmen and bowmen; and crows were gathered 
thick above him, for they thought that war was awaken¬ 
ing again, such as had not been in those parts for a long 
age. 

But the king, when he received the prayers of Bard, 
had pity, for he was the lord of a good and kindly people; 
so turning his march, which had at first been direct to- 

m 



THE HOBBIT 


wards the Mountain, he hastened now down the river to 
the Long Lake. He had not boats or rafts enough for his 
host, and they were forced to go the slower way by foot; 
but great store of goods he sent ahead by water. Still, elves 
are lightfooted, and though they were not in these days 
much used to the marches and the treacherous lands be¬ 
tween the Forest and the Lake, their going was swift. 
Only five days after the death of the dragon they came 
upon the shores and looked on the ruins of the town. 
Their welcome was good, as may be expected, and the 
men and their Master were ready to make any bargain 
for the future in return for the Elvenking's aid. 

Their plans were soon made. With the women and the 
children, the old and the unfit, the Master remained be¬ 
hind; and with him were some men of crafts and many 
skilled elves; and they busied themselves felling trees, 
and collecting the timber sent down from the Forest. 
Then they set about raising many huts by the shore 
against the oncoming winter; and also under the Master's 
direction they began the planning of a new town, de¬ 
signed more fair and large even than before, but not in 
the same place. They removed northward higher up the 
shore; for ever after they had a dread of the water where 
the dragon lay. He would never again return to his 
golden bed, but was stretched cold as stone, twisted upon 
the floor of the shallows. There for ages his huge bones 
could be seen in calm weather amid the ruined piles of 
the old town. But few dared to cross the cursed spot, and 
none dared to dive into the shivering water or recover the 
precious stones that fell from his rotting carcase. 

But all the men of arms who were still able, and the 
most of the Elvenking’s array, got ready to march north 
to the Mountain. It was thus that in eleven days from the 
ruin of the town the head of their host passed the rock- 
gates at the end of the lake and came into the desolate 
lands. 



15 The gathering of the clouds 

Now we will return to Bilbo and the dwarves. All night 
one of them had watched, but when morning came they 
had not heard or seen any sign of danger. But ever more 
thickly the birds were gathering. Their companies came 
flying from the South; and the crows that still lived about 
the Mountain were wheeling and crying unceasingly 
above. 

‘Something strange is happening/ said Thorin. ‘The 
time has gone for the autumn wanderings; and these are 
birds that dwell always in the land; there are starlings 
and flocks of finches; and far off there are many carrion 
birds as if a battle were afoot 1’ 

Suddenly Bilbo pointed: ‘There is that old thrush 
again I * he cried. ‘He seems to have escaped, when Smaug 
smashed the mountain-side, but I don't suppose the snails 
have I’ 

Sure enough the old thrush was there, and as Bilbo 
pointed, he flew towards them and perched on a stone 
near by. Then he fluttered his wings and sang; then he 
cocked his head on one side, as if to listen; and again he 
sang, and again he listened. 

‘I believe he is trying to tell us something,’ said Balin; 
‘but I cannot follow the speech of such birds, it is very 
quick and difficult. Can you make it out, Baggins?’ 

‘Not very well,* said Bilbo (as a matter of fact, he could 
make nothing of it at all); ‘but the old fellow seems very 
excited.’ 

‘I only wish he was a raven I ’ said Balin. 

‘I thought you did not like them I You seemed very shy 
of them, when we came this way before.’ 

‘Those were crows I And nasty suspicious-looking 
creatures at that, and rude as well. You must have heard 



THE HOBBIT 


the Ugly names they were calling after us. But the ravens 
are different. There used to be great friendship betweeen 
them and the people of Thror; and they often brought us 
secret news, and were rewarded with such bright things as 
they coveted to hide in their dwellings. 

‘They live many a year, and their memories are long, 
and they hand on their wisdom to their children. I knew 
many among the ravens of the rocks when I was a dwarf- 
lad. This very height was once named Ravenhill, because 
there was a wise and famous pair, old Care and his wife, 
that lived here above the guard-chamber. But I don't 
suppose that any of that ancient breed linger here now.’ 

No sooner had he finished speaking than the old 
thrush gave a loud call, and immediately flew away. 

‘We may not understand him, but that old bird under¬ 
stands us, I am sure,’ said Balin. ‘Keep watch now, and 
see what happens I ’ 

Before long there was a fluttering of wings, and back 
came the thrush; and with him came a most decrepit old 
bird. He was getting blind, he could hardly fly, and the 
top of his head was bald. He was an aged raven of great 
size. He alighted stiffly on the ground before them, slowly 
flapped his wings, and bobbed towards Thorin. 

‘O Thorin son of Thrain, and Balin son of Fundin,’ he 
croaked (and Bilbo could understand what he said, for he 
used ordinary language and not bird-speech). ‘I am Roac 
son of Care. Care is dead, but he was well known to you 
once. It is a hundred years and three and fifty since I 
came out of the egg, but I do not forget what my father 
told me. Now I am the chief of the great ravens of the 
Mountain. We are few, but we remember still the king 
that was of old. Most of my people are abroad, for there 
are great tidings in the South - some are tidings of joy to 
you, and some you will not think so good. 

‘Behold 1 The birds are gathering back again to the 
Mountain and to Dale from South and East and West, 
for word has gone out that Smaug is deadl ’ 

«S6 



THE GATHERING OF THE CLOUDS 

‘Dead? Dead?* shouted the dwarves. ‘Dead? Then we 
have been in needless fear - and the treasure is ours!* 
They all sprang up and began to caper about for joy. 

‘Yes, dead,* said Roac. ‘The thrush, may his feathers 
never fall, saw him die, and we may trust his words. He 
saw him fall in battle with the men of Esgaroth the third 
night back from now at the rising of the moon.* 

It was some time before Thor in could bring the 
dwarves to be silent and listen to the raven*s news. At 
length when he had told all the tale of the battle he went 
on: 

‘So much for joy, Thorin Oakenshield. You may go 
back to your halls in safety; all the treasure is yours - for 
the moment. But many are gathering hither beside the 
birds. The news of the death of the guardian has already 
gone far and wide, and the legend of the wealth of Thror 
has not lost in the telling during many years; many are 
eager for a share of the spoil. Already a host of the elves is 
on the way, and carrion birds are with them hoping for 
battle and slaughter. By the lake men murmur that their 
sorrows are due to the dwarves; for they are homeless and 
many have died; and Smaug has destroyed their town. 
They too think to find amends from your treasure, 
whether you are alive or dead. 

‘Your own wisdom must decide your course; but thirteen 
is small remnant of the great folk of Durin that once dwelt 
here, and now are scattered far. If you will listen to my 
counsel, you will not trust the Master of the Lake-men, 
but rather him that shot the dragon with his bow. Bard is 
he, of the race of Dale, of the line of Girion; he is a grim 
man but true. We would see peace once more among 
dwarves and men and elves after the long desolation; but 
it may cost you dear in gold. I have spoken.* 

Then Thorin burst forth in anger: ‘Our thanks, RoMc 
Carc*s son. You and your people shall not be forgotten. 
But none of our gold shall thieves take or the violent 
carry off while we are alive. If you would earn our thanks 

«S7 



THE HOBBIT 


Still more, bring us news of any that draw near. Also I 
would beg of you, if any of you are still young and strong 
of wing, that you would send messengers to our kin in the 
mountains of the North, both west from here and east, 
and tell them of our plight. But go specially to my cousin 
Dain in the Iron Hills, for he has many people well- 
armed, and dwells nearest to this place. Bid him hasten!' 

1 will not say if this counsel be good or bad,’ croaked 
Roac; ‘but I will do what can be done.* Then off he 
slowly flew. 

‘Back now to the Mountain I * cried Thorin. ‘We have 
little time to lose.* 

‘And little food to use I * cried Bilbo, always practical 
on such points. In any case he felt that the adventure was, 
properly speaking, over with the death of the dragon - in 
which he was much mistaken - and he would have given 
most of his share of the profits for the peaceful winding 
up of these affairs. 

‘Back to the Mountain!* cried the dwarves as if they 
had not heard him; so back he had to go with them. 

As you have heard some of the events already, you will 
see that the dwarves still had some days before them. 
They explored the caverns once more, and found, as they 
expected, that only the Front Gate remained open; all 
the other gates (except, of course, the small secret door) 
had long ago been broken and blocked by Smaug, and no 
sign of them remained. So now they began to labour hard 
in fortifying the main entrance, and in making a new 
path that led from it. Tools were to be found in plenty 
that the miners and quarriers and builders of old had 
used; and at such work the dwarves were still very skilled. 

As they worked the ravens brought them constant 
tidings. In this way they learned that the Elvenking had 
turned aside to the Lake, and they still had a breathing 
space. Better still, they heard that three of their ponies 
had escaped and were wandering wild far down the 

*88 



THE GATHERING OF THE CLOUDS 

banks of the Running River, not far from where the rest 
of their stores had been left. So while the others went on 
with their work, Fili and Kili were sent, guided by a 
raven, to find the ponies and bring back all they could. 

They were four days gone, and by that time they knew 
that the joined armies of the L tke-men and the Elves 
were hurrying towards the Mountain. But now their 
hopes were higher; for they had ft >od for some weeks with 
care - chiefly crarriy of course, and they were very tired of 
it; but cram is much better than nothing - and already 
the gate was blocked with a wall of squared stones laid 
dry, but very thick and high, across the opening. There 
were holes in the wall through which they could see (or 
shoot), but no entrance. They climbed in or out with 
ladders, and hauled stuff up with ropes. For the issuing of 
the stream they had contrived a small low arch under the 
new wall; but near the entrance they had so altered the 
narrow bed that a wide pool stretched from the moun¬ 
tain-wall to the head of the fall over which the stream 
went towards Dale. Approach to the Gate was now only 
possible, without swimming, along a narrow ledge of the 
cliff, to the right as one looked outwards from the wall. 
The ponies they had brought only to the head of the 
steps above the old bridge, and unloading them there 
had bidden them return to their masters and sent them 
back riderless to the South. 

There came a night when suddenly there were many 
lights as of fires and torches away south in Dale before 
them. 

‘They have cornel' called Balin. ‘And their camp is 
very great. They must have come into the valley under 
the cover of dusk along both banks of the river.* 

That night the dwarves slept little. The morning was 
still pale when they saw a company approaching. From 
behind their wall they watched them come up to the 
valley's head and climb slowly up. Before long they could 

*89 



THE HOBBIT 


see that both men of the lake armed as if for war and 
elvish bowmen were among them. At length the foremost 
of these climbed the tumbled rocks and appeared at the 
top of the falls; and very great was their surprise to see 
the pool before them and the Gate blocked with a wall of 
new-hewn stone. 

As they stood pointing and speaking to one another 
Thorin hailed them: ‘Who are you/ he called in a very 
loud voice, ‘that come as if in war to the gates of Thorin 
son of Thrain, King under the Mountain, and what 
do you desire?* 

But they answered nothing. Some turned swiftly back, 
and the others after gazing for a while at the Gate and its 
defences soon followed them. That day the camp was 
moved to the east of the river, right between the arms of 
the Mountain. The rocks echoed then with voices and 
with song, as they had not done for many a day. There 
was the sound, too, of elven-harps and of sweet music; 
and as it echoed up towards them it seemed that the chill 
of the air was warmed, and they caught faintly the frag* 
ranee of woodland flowers blossoming in spring. 

Then Bilbo longed to escape from the dark fortress 
and to go down and join in the mirth and feasting by the 
fires. Some of the younger dwarves were moved in their 
hearts, too, and they muttered that they wished things 
had fallen out otherwise and that they might welcome 
such folk as friends, but Thorin scowled. 

Then the dwarves themselves brought forth harps and 
instruments regained from the hoard, and made music to 
soften his mood; but their song was not an elvish song, 
and was much like the song they had sung long before in 
Bilbo’s little hobbit-hole. 

Under the Mountain dark and tall 
The King has come unto his hall! 

His foe is dead, the Worm of Dread, 

And ever so his foes shall fall. 

940 



THE GATHERING OF THE CLOUDS 

The sword is sharp, the <pear is long. 

The arrow swift, the Ga'e is strong; 

The heart is bold that Ivoks on gold; 

The dwarves no more shall suffer wrong. 

The dwarves of yore ma !e mighty spells. 

While hammers fell like ringing bells 
In places deep, where dark things sleep. 

In hollow halls beneath fhe fells. 

On silver necklaces they strung 
The light of stars, on crowns they hung 
The dragon-fire, from hoisted wire 
The melody of harps they wrung. 

The mountain throne once more is freed! 

O! wandering folk, the summons heed! 

Come haste! Come haste! across the waste! 

The king of friend and kin has need. 

Now call we over mountains cold, 

*Come back unto the caverns old*! 

Here at the Gates the king awaits, 

His hands are rich with gems and gold. 

The king is come unto his hall 
Under the Mountain dark and tall. 

The Worm of Dread is slain and dead, 

And ever so our foes shall fall! 

This song appeared to please Thorin, and he smiled 
again and grew merry; and he began reckoning the dis¬ 
tance to the Iron Hills and how long it would be before 
Dain could reach the Lonely Mountain, if he had set out 
as soon as the message reached him. But Bilbo’s heart fell, 
both at the song and the talk: they sounded much too 
warlike. 

Ml 



THE HOBBIT 


The next morning early a company of spearmen was 
seen crossing the river, and marching up the valley. They 
bore with them the green banner of the Elvenking and 
the blue banner of the Lake, and they advanced until 
they stood right before the wall at the Gate. 

Again Thorin hailed them in a loud voice: ‘Who are 
you that come armed for war to the gates of Thorin son 
of Thrain, King under the Mountain?* This time he was 
answered. 

A tall man stood forward, dark of hair and grim of 
face, and he cried: ‘Hail Thorin! Why do you fence 
yourself like a robber in his hold? We are not yet foes, 
and we rejoice that you are alive beyond our hope. We 
came expecting to find none living here; yet now that we 
are met there is matter for a parley and a council.* 

‘Who are you, and of what would you parley?* 

‘I am Bard, and by my hand was the dragon slain and 
your treasure delivered. Is that not a matter that concerns 
you? Moreover I am by right descent the heir of Girion 
of Dale, and in your hoard is mingled much of the wealth 
of his halls and town, which of old Smaug stole. Is not 
that a matter of which we may speak? Further, in his last 
battle Smaug destroyed the dwellings of the men of 
Esgaroth, and I am yet the servant of their Master. I 
would speak for him and ask whether you have no 
thought for the sorrow and misery of his people. They 
aided you in your distress, and in recompense you have 
thus far brought ruin only, though doubtless un¬ 
designed.* 

Now these were fair words and true, if proudly and 
grimly spoken; and Bilbo thought that Thorin would at 
once admit what justice was in them. He did not, of 
course, expect that any one would remember that it was 
he who discovered all by himself the dragon's weak spot; 
and that was just as well, for no one ever did. But also he 
did not reckon with the power that gold has upon which 
a dragon has long brooded, nor with dwarvish hearts. 

24a 



THE GATHERING OF THE CLOUDS 

Long hours in the past days Thorin had spent in the 
treasury, and the lust of it was lieavy on him. Though he 
had hunted chiefly for the Arkc nstone, yet he had an eye 
for many another wonderful thing that was flying there, 
about which were wound old memories of the labours 
and the sorrows of his race. 

'You put your worst cause la t and in the chief place,' 
Thorin answered. 'To the treasure of my people no man 
has a claim, because Smaug ^^ho stole it from us also 
robbed him of life or home. The treasure was not his that 
his evil deeds should be amended with a share of it. The 
price of the goods and the assistance that we received of 
the Lake-men we will fairly pay - in due time. But noth- 
ing will we give, not even a loaf s worth, under threat of 
force. While an armed host lies before our doors, we look 
on you as foes and thieves. 

'It is in my mind to ask what share of their in- 
heritence you would have paid to our kindred, had you 
found the hoard unguarded and us slain.' 

'A just question,' replied Bard. 'But you are not dead, 
and we are not robbers. Moreover the wealthy may have 
pity beyond right on the needy that befriended them 
when they were in want. And still my other claims re¬ 
main unanswered.’ 

'I will not parley, as I have said, with armed men at my 
gate. Nor at all with the people of the Elvenking, whom I 
remember with small kindness. In this debate they have 
no place. Begone now ere our arrows flyl And if you 
would speak with me again, first dismiss the elvish host to 
the woods where it belongs, and then return, laying down 
your arms before you approach the threshold.’ 

'The Elvenking is my friend, and he has succoured the 
people of the Lake in their need, though they had no 
claim but friendship on him,’ answered Bard. *We will 
give you time to repent your words. Gather your wisdom 
ere we return I' Then he departed and went back to the 
camp. 





THE HOBBIT 


Ere many hours were past, the banner-bearers re¬ 
turned, and trumpeters stood forth and blew a blast: 

‘In the name of Esgaroth and the Forest,* one cried, ‘we 
speak unto Thorin Thrain’s son Oakenshield, calling 
himself the King under the Mountain, and we bid him 
consider well the claims that have been urged, or be 
declared our foe. At the least he shall deliver one twelfth 
portion of the treasure unto Bard, as the dragon-slayer, 
and as the heir of Girion. From that portion Bard will 
himself contribute to the aid of Esgaroth; but if Thorin 
would have the friendship and honour of the lands 
about, as his sires had of old, then he will give also some¬ 
what of his own for the comfort of the men of the Lake.’ 

Then Thorin seized a bow of horn and shot an arrow 
at the speaker. It smote into his shield and stuck there 
quivering. 

‘Since such is your answer,* he called in return, ‘I de¬ 
clare the Mountain besieged. You shall not depart from 
it, until you call on your side for a truce and a parley. We 
will bear no weapons against you, but we leave you to 
your gold. You may eat that, if you will 1 * 

With that the messengers departed swiftly, and the 
dwarves were left to consider their case. So grim had 
Thorin become, that even if they had wished, the others 
would not have dared to hnd fault with him; but indeed 
most of them seemed to share his mind - except perhaps 
old fat Bombur and Fili and Kili. Bilbo, of course, 
disapproved of the whole turn of affairs. He had by now 
had more than enough of the Mountain, and being be¬ 
sieged inside it was not at all to his taste. 

‘The whole place still stinks of dragon,* he grumbled to 
himself, ‘and it makes me sick. And cram is beginning 
simply to stick in my throat.* 


*44 



16 A thief in the night 

Now the days passed slowly and wearily. Many of the 
dwarves spent their time piHng and ordering the 
treasure; and now Thorin spote of the Arkenstone of 
Thrain, and bade them eagerly to look for it in every 
corner. 

Tor the Arkenstone of my father/ he said, ‘is worth 
more than a river of gold in itself, and to me it is beyond 
price. That stone of all the treasure I name unto myself, 
and I will be avenged on anyone who finds it and with¬ 
holds it.’ 

Bilbo heard these words and grew afraid, wondering 
what would happen, if the stone was found - wrapped in 
an old bundle of tattered oddments that he used as a 
pillow. All the same he did not speak of it, for as the 
weariness of the days grew heavier, the beginnings of a 
plan had come into his little head. 

Things had gone on like this for some time, when the 
ravens brought news that Dain and more than five hun¬ 
dred dwarves, hurrying from the Iron Hills, were now 
within about two days* march of Dale, coming from the 
North-East. 

‘But they cannot reach the Mountain unmarked,* said 
Roac, ‘and I fear lest there be battle in the valley. I do 
not call this counsel good. Though they are a grim folk, 
they are not likely to overcome the host that besets you; 
and even if they did so, what will you gain? Winter and 
snow is hastening behind them. How shall you be fed 
without the friendship and goodwill of the lands about 
you? The treasure is likely to be your death, though the 
dragon is no morel* 

But Thorin was not moved. ‘Winter and snow will bite 
both men and elves,* he said, ‘and they may find their 

*45 



THE HOBBIT 


dwelling in the waste grievous to bear. With my friends 
behind them and winter upon them, they will perhaps be 
in softer mood to parley with.' 

That night Bilbo made up his mind. The sky was black 
and moonless. As soon as it was full dark, he went to a 
corner of an inner chamber just within the gate and drew 
from his bundle a rope, and also the Arkenstone wrapped 
in a rag. Then he climbed to the top of the wall. Only 
Bombur was there, for it was his turn to watch, and the 
dwarves kept only one watchman at a time. 

‘It is mighty cold!' said Bombur. ‘I wish we could have 
a fire up here as they have in the camp!' 

‘It is warm enough inside,’ said Bilbo. 

‘I daresay; but I am bound here till midnight,’ 
grumbled the fat dwarf. ‘A sorry business altogether. Not 
that I venture to disagree with Thorin, may his beard 
grow ever longer; yet he was ever a dwarf with a stiff 
neck.* 

‘Not as stiff as my legs,’ said Bilbo. *I am tired of stairs 
and stone passages. I would give a good deal for the feel 
of grass at my toes.’ 

‘I would give a good deal for the feel of a strong drink 
in my throat, and for a soft bed after a good supper!* 

‘I can’t give you those, while the siege is going on. But 
it is long since I watched, and I will take your turn for 
you, if you like. There is no sleep in me tonight.’ 

‘You are a good fellow, Mr. Baggins, and I will take 
your offer kindly. If there should be anything to note, 
rouse me first, mind you 1 I will lie in the inner chamber 
to the left, not far away.’ 

‘Off you go! * said Bilbo. ‘I will wake you at midnight, 
and you can wake the next watchman.’ 

As soon as Bombur had gone. Bilbo put on his ring* 
fastened his rope, slipped down over the wall, and was 
gone. He had about five hours before him. Bombur 
would sleep (he could sleep at any time, and ever since 
the adventure in the forest he was always trying to rc- 

246 



A THIEF IN THE NIGHT 

capture the beautiful dreams he had then); and all the 
others were busy with Thorin. ft was unlikely that any, 
even Fili or Kili, would come out on the wall until it was 
their turn. 

It was very dark, and the road after a while, when he 
left the newly made path and climbed down towards the 
lower course of the stream, was ^trange to him. At last he 
came to the bend where he had to cross the water, if he 
was to make for the camp, as he wdshed. The bed of the 
stream was there shallow but already broad, and fording 
it in the dark was not easy for the little hobbit. He was 
nearly across when he missed his footing on a round stone 
and fell into the cold water with a splash. He had barely 
scrambled out on the far bank, shivering and spluttering, 
when up came elves in the gloom with bright lanterns 
and searched for the cause of the noise. 

‘That was no fish 1 ’ one said. ‘There is a spy about. 
Hide your lights! They will help him more than us, if it 
is that queer little creature that is said to be their 
servant.* 

‘Servant, indeed! * snorted Bilbo; and in the middle of 
his snort he sneezed loudly, and the elves immediately 
gathered towards the sound. 

‘Let’s have a light! ’ he said. ‘I am here, if you want 
me! * and he slipped off his ring, and popped from be¬ 
hind a rock. 

They seized him quickly, in spite of their surprise. 
‘Who are you? Are you the dwarves’ hobbit? What are 
you doing? How did you get so far past our sentinels?’ 
they asked one after another. 

‘I am Mr. Bilbo Baggins,’ he answered, ‘companion of 
Thorin, if you want to know. I know your king well by 
sight, though perhaps he doesn’t know me to look at. But 
Bard will remember me, and it is Bard I particularly 
want to see.’ 

‘Indeed!* said they, ‘and what may be your business?’ 

‘Whatever it is, it’s my own, my good elves. But if you 

«47 



THE HOBBIT 


wish ever to get back to your own woods from this cold 
cheerless place/ he answered shivering, ‘you will take me 
along quick to a fire, where I can dry - and then you will 
let me speak to your chiefs as quick as may be. I have only 
an hour or two to spare/ 

That is how it came about that some two hours after 
his escape from the Gate, Bilbo was sitting beside a warm 
fire in front of a large tent, and there sat too, gazing 
curiously at him, both the Elvenking and Bard. A hobbit 
in elvish armour, partly wrapped in an old blanket, was 
something new to them. 

‘Really you know,* Bilbo was saying in his best business 
manner, ‘things are impossible. Personally I am tired of 
the whole affair. I wish I was back in the West in my own 
home, where folk arc more reasonable. But I have an 
interest in this matter - one fourteenth share, to be pre¬ 
cise, according to a letter, which fortunately I believe I 
have kept.* He drew from a pocket in his old jacket 
(which he still wore over his mail), crumpled and much 
folded, Thocin’s letter that had been put under the clock 
on his mantelpiece in May! 

‘A share in the profits, mind you,* he went on. ‘I am 
aware of that. Personally I am only too ready to consider 
all your claims carefully, and deduct what is right from 
the total before putting in my own claim. However you 
don't know Thorin Oakenshield as well as I do now. I 
assure you, he is quite ready to sit on a heap of gold and 
starve, as long as you sit here.’ 

‘Well, let him!’ said Bard. ‘Such a fool deserves to 
starve.' 

‘Quite so,' said Bilbo. ‘I see your point of view. At the 
same time winter is coming on fast. Before long you will 
be having snow and what not, and supplies will be diffi¬ 
cult - eveii f(fr elves I imagine. Also there will be other 
difficulties. You have not heard of Dain and the dwarves 
of the Iron Hills?' 

248 



A THIEF IN THF NIGHT , 

*We have, a long time ago; but what has he got to do 
with us?* asked the king. 

‘I thought as much. I see I ha\e some information you 
have not got. Dain, I may tell >ou, is now less than two 
days* march off, and has at h^ast five hundred grim 
dwarves with him - a good many of them have had ex¬ 
perience in the dreadful dwarf and goblin wars, of which 
you have no doubt heard. When they arrive there may be 
serious trouble.* 

‘Why do you tell us this? Are you betraying your 
friends, or are you threatening us?* asked Bard grimly. 

‘My dear Bard! ’ squeaked Bilbo. ‘Don’t be so hasty! I 
never met such suspicious folk! I am merely trying to 
avoid trouble for all concerned. Now I will make you an 
offer! * 

‘Let us hear it!* they said. 

‘You may see it! ’ said he. ‘It is this! * and he drew forth 
the Arkenstone, and threw away the wrapping. 

The Elvenking himself, whose eyes were used to things 
of wonder and beauty, stood up in amazement. Even 
Bard gazed marvelling at it in silence. It was as if a globe 
had been filled with moonlight and hung before them in 
a net woven of the glint of frosty stars. 

‘This is the Arkenstone of Thrain,’ said Bilbo, ‘the 
Heart of the Mountain; and it is also the heart of 
Thorin. He values it above a river of gold. I give it to 
you. It will aid you in your bargaining.* Then Bilbo,-not 
without a shudder, not without a glance of longing, 
handed the marvellous stone to Bard, and he held it in 
his hand, as though dazed. 

‘But how is it yours to give?’ he asked at last with an 
effort. 

‘O well I * said the hobbit uncomfortably, ‘it isn’t 
exactly; but, well, I am willing to let it stand against all 
my claim, don’t you know. I may be a burglar - or so they 
say: personally I never really felt like one - but I am an 
honest one, 1 hope, more or less. Anyway I am going back 

«49 



THE HOBBIT 


now, and the dwarves can do what they like to me. I hope 
you will find it useful.* 

The Elvenking looked at Bilbo with a new wonder. 
'Bilbo Baggins! * he said, ‘you are more worthy to wear 
the armour of elf-princes than many that have looked 
more comely in it. But I wonder if Thorin Oakenshield 
will see it so. I have more knowledge of dwarves in 
general than you have perhaps. I advise you to remain 
with us, and here you shall be honoured and thrice wel¬ 
come.* 

‘Thank you very much I am sure,* said Bilbo with a 
bow. ‘But I don*t think I ought to leave my friends like 
this, after all we have gone through together. And I 
promised to wake old Bombur at midnight, too I Really I 
must be going, and quickly.* 

Nothing they could say would stop him; so an escort 
was provided for him, and as he went both the king 
and Bard saluted him with honour. As they passed 
through the camp an old man wrapped in a dark cloak, 
rose from a tent door where he was sitting and came 
towards them. 

‘Well done! Mr. Baggins! * he said, clapping Bilbo on 
the back. ‘There is always more about you than anyone 
expects!' It was Gandalf. 

For the first time for many a day Bilbo was really de¬ 
lighted. But there was no time for all the questions that 
he immediately wished to ask. 

‘All in good time! * said Gandalf. ‘Things are drawing 
towards the end now, unless 1 am mistaken. There is an 
unpleasant time just in front of you; but keep your heart 
up! You may come through all right. There is news 
brewing that even the ravens haye not heard. Good 
night!’ 

Puzzled but cheered. Bilbo hurried on. He was guided 
to a safe ford and set across dry, and then he said farewell 
to the elves and climbed carefully back towards the Gate. 
Great weariness began to come over him; but it was well 

«50 



THE CLOUDS BURST 


before midnight when he clambeied up the rope again - 
it was still where he had left it. lie untied it and hid it, 
and then he sat down on the wall and wondered anxi¬ 
ously what would happen next. 

At midnight he woke up Bom bur; and then in turn 
rolled himself up in his corner, w ithout listening to the 
old dwarfs thanks (which he felt he had hardly earned). 
He was soon fast asleep forgetting all his worries till the 
morning. As a matter of fact he was dreaming of eggs and 
bacon. 


17 The clouds burst 

Next day the trumpets rang early in the camp. Soon a 
single runner was seen hurrying along the narrow path. 
At a distance he stood and hailed them, asking whether 
Thorin would now listen to another embassy, since new 
tidings had come to hand, and matters were changed. 

‘That will be Dainl' said Thorin when he heard. 
‘They will have got wind of his coming. I thought that 
would alter their mood I Bid them come few in number 
and weaponless, and I will hear,' he called to the mes¬ 
senger. 

About midday the banners of the Forest and the Lake 
were seen to be borne forth again. A company of twenty 
was approaching. At the beginning of the narrow way 
they laid aside sword and spear, and came on towards the 
Gate. Wondering, the dwarves saw that among them were 
both Bard and the Elvenking, before whom an old man 
wrapped in cloak and hood bore a strong casket of iron- 
bound wood. 

‘Hail Thorin I' said Bard. ‘Are you still of the same 

mind?' 



THE HOBBIT 


*My mind does not change with the rising and setting 
of a few suns/ answered Thorin. ‘Did you come to ask me 
idle questions? Still the elf>host has not departed as 
I bade! Till then you come in vain to bargain with 
me/ 

‘Is there then nothing for which you would yield any of 
your gold?' 

‘Nothing that you or your friends have to offer/ 

‘What of the Arkenstone of Thrain?' said he, and at 
the same moment the old man opened the casket and 
held aloft the jewel. The light leapt from his hand, 
bright and white in the morning. 

Then Thorin was stricken dumb with amazement and 
confusion. No one spoke for a long while. 

Thorin at length broke the silence, and his voice was 
thick with wrath. ‘That stone was my father's, and is 
mine,' he said. ‘Why should I purchase my own?' But 
wonder overcame him and he added: ‘But how came you 
by the heirloom of my house - if there is need to ask such 
a question of thieves?' 

‘We are not thieves,' Bard answered. ‘Your own we will 
give back in return for our own.' 

‘How came you by it?’ shouted Thorin in gathering 
rage. 

‘I gave it them!' squeaked Bilbo, who was peeping over 
the wall, by now in a dreadful fright. 

‘You! You!’ cried Thorin, turning upon him and 
grasping him with both hands. ‘You miserable hobbit! 
You undersized - burglar! ’ he shouted at a loss for words, 
and he shook poor Bilbo like a rabbit. 

‘By the beard of Durin! I wish I had Gandalf here! 
Curse him for his choice of you! May his beard wither! 
As for you I will throw you to the rocks!' he cried and 
lifted Bilbo in his arms. 

‘Stay! Your wish is granted I' said a voice. The old man 
with* the casket threw aside his hood and cloak. ‘Here is 
Gandalf! And none too soon it seems. If you don't like 



THE CLOUDS BURST 

my Burglar, please don’t damage him. Put him down, 
and listen first to what he has to say! * 

‘You all seem in league I ’ said Fhorin dropping Bilbo 
on the top of the wall. ‘Never again will I have dealings 
with any wizard or his friends. What have you to say, you 
descendant of rats?’ 

‘Dear me! Dear me! ’ said Bil!>o. ‘I am sure this is all 
very uncomfortable. You may remember saying that I 
might choose my own fourteenth share? Perhaps I took it 
too literally - I have been told that dwarves are some¬ 
times politer in word than in deed. The time was, all the 
same, when you seemed to think that I had been of some 
service. Descendant of rats, indeed! Is this all the service 
of you and your family that I was promised, Thorin? 
Take it that I have disposed of my share as I wished, and 
let it go at that! ’ 

‘I will,’ said Thorin grimly. ‘And I will let you go at 
that ~ and may we never meet again! ’ Then he turned 
and spoke over the wall. *I am betrayed,’ he said. ‘It was 
rightly guessed that I could not forbear to redeem the 
Arkenstone, the treasure of my house. For it I will give 
one fourteenth share of the hoard in silver and gold, set¬ 
ting aside the gems; but that shall be accounted the pro¬ 
mised share of this traitor, and with that reward he shall 
depart, and you can divide it as you will. He will get little 
enough, I doubt not. Take him, if you wish him to liye; 
and no friendship of mine goes with him. 

‘Get down now to your friends! ’ he said to Bilbo, ‘or I 
will throw you down.* 

‘What about the gold and silver?* asked Bilbo. 

‘That shall follow after, as can be arranged,* said he. 
‘Get down 1 * 

‘Until then we keep the stone,’ cried Bard. 

‘You are not making a very splendid figure as King 
under the Mountain,’ said Gandalf. ‘But things may 
change yet.* 

‘They may indeed,* said Thorin. And already, so strong 

m 



• THE HOBBIT 

was tKe bewilderment of the treasure upon him, he was 
pondering whether by the help of Dain he might not re¬ 
capture the Arkenstone and withhold the share of the 
Yeward. 

And so Bilbo was swung down from the wall, and de¬ 
parted with nothing for all his trouble, except the 
armour which Thorin had given him already. More than 
one of the dwarves in their hearts felt shame and pity at 
his going. 

‘Farewell! * he cried to them. ‘We may meet again as 
friends.* 

‘Be offl* called Thorin. ‘You have mail upon you, 
which was made by my folk, and is too good for you. It 
cannot be pierced by arrows; but if you do not hasten, I 
will sting your miserable feet. So be swift! * 

‘Not so hasty! ’ said Bard. ‘We will give you until to¬ 
morrow. At noon we will return, and see if you have 
brought from the hoard the portion that is to be set 
against the stone. If that is done without deceit, then we 
will depart, and the elfiJst will go back to the Forest. In 
the meanwhile farewelj * 

With that they went back to the camp; but Thorin 
sent messengers by Roac telling Dain of what had passed, 
and bidding him come with wary speed. 

That day passed and the night. The next day the wind 
shifted west, and the air was dark and gloomy. The 
morning was still early when a cry was heard in the camp. 
Runners came in to report that a host of dwarves had 
appeared round the eastern spur of the Mountain and 
was now hastening to Dale. Dain had come. He had 
hurried on through the night, and so had come upon 
them sooner than they had expected. Each one of his folk 
was clad in a hauberk of steel mail that hung to his knees, 
and his legs were covered with hose of a fine and flexible 
metal mesh, the secret of whose making was possessed by 
Dain’s people. The dwarves are exceedingly strong for 

«54 



THE CLOUDS BURST 

their height, but most of these were strong even for 
dwarves. In battle they wielded heavy two-handed mat¬ 
tocks; but each of them had also i short broad sword at 
his side and a roundshield slung at his back. Their beards 
were forked and plaited and thrus: into their belts. Their 
caps were of iron and they were shod with iron, and their 
faces were grim. 

Trumpets called men and elves to arms. Before long 
the dwarves could be seen coming up the valley at a great 
pace. They halted between the river and the eastern 
spur; but a few held on their way, and crossing the river 
drew near the camp; and there they laid down their 
weapons and held up their hands in sign of peace. Bard 
went out to meet them, and with him went Bilbo. 

‘We are sent from Dain son of Nain,‘ they said when 
questioned. ‘We are hastening to our kinsmen in the 
Mountain, since we learn that the kingdom of old is 
renewed. But who are you that sit in the plain as foes 
before defended walls?’ This, of course, in the polite and 
rather old-fashioned language of such occasions, meant 
simply: ‘You have no business here. We are going on, so 
make Way or we shall fight you I ’ They meant to push on 
between the Mountain and the loop of the river; for the 
narrow land there did not seem to be strongly guarded. 

Bard, of course, refused to allow the dwarves to go 
straight on to the Mountain. He was determined to wait 
until the gold and silver had been brought out in ex¬ 
change for the Arkenstone; for he did not believe that 
this would be done, if once the fortress was manned with 
so large and warlike a company. They had brought with 
them a great store of supplies; for the dwarves can carry 
very heavy burdens, and nearly all of Dain’s folk, in spite 
of their rapid march, bore huge packs on their backs in 
addition to their weapons. They would stand a siege for 
weeks, and by that time yet more dwarves might come, 
and yet more, for Thorin had many relatives. Also they 
would be able to reopen and guard some other gate, so 

*55 



THE HOBBIT 


that the besiegers would have to encircle the whole 
mountain; and for that they had not sufficient numbers. 

These were, in fact, precisely their plans (for the raven- 
messengers had been busy between Thorin and Dain); 
but for the moment the way was barred, so after angry 
words the dwarf-messengers retired muttering in their 
beards. Bard then sent messengers at once to the Gate; 
but they found no gold or payment. Arrows came forth as 
soon as they were within shot, and they hastened back in 
dismay. In the camp all was now astir, as if for battle; for 
the dwarves of Dain were advancing along the eastern 
bank. 

Tools! * laughed Bard, ‘to come thus beneath the 
Mountain’s arm! They do not understand war above 
ground, whatever they may know of battle in the mines. 
There are many of our archers and spearmen now hidden 
in the rocks upon their right flank. Dwarf-mail may be 
good, but they will soon be hard put to it. Let us set on 
them now from both sides, before they are fully rested!’ 

But the Elvenking said: ‘Long will I tarry, ere I begin 
this war for gold. The dwarves cannot pass us, unless we 
will, or do anything that we cannot mark. Let us hope 
still for something that will bring reconciliation. Our 
advantage in numbers will be enough, if in the end it 
must come to unhappy blows.’ 

. But he reckoned without the dwarves. The knowledge 
that the Arkenstone was in the hands of the besiegers 
burned in their thoughts; also they guessed the hesitation 
of Bard and his friends, and resolved to strike while they 
debated. 

Suddenly without a signal they sprang silently forward 
to attack. Bows twanged and arrows whistled; battle was 
about to be joined. 

Still more suddenly a darkness came on with dreadful 
swiftness! A black doud hurried over the sky. Winter 
thunder on a wild wind rolled roaring up and rumbled 
in the Mountain, and lightning lit its peak. And beneath 

*56 



THE CLOUDS BURST 


the thunder another blackness could be seen whirling 
forward; but it did not come with the wind, it came from 
the North, like a vast cloud of lairds, so dense that no 
light could be seen between their wings. 

‘Halt!’ cried Gandalf, who appeared suddenly, and 
stood alone, with arms uplifted, !»etween the advancing 
dwarves and the ranks awaiting them. ‘Halt!* he called 
in a voice like thunder, and his staff blazed forth with a 
flash like the lightning. ‘Dread hi\s come upon you all! 
Alas! It has come more swiftly than I guessed. The 
Goblins are upon you! Bolg* of the North is coming, O 
Dain! whose father you slew in Moria. Behold! The 
bats are above his army like a sea of locusts. They ride 
upon wolves and Wargs are in their train!’ 

Amazement and confusion fell upon them all. Even as 
Gandalf had been speaking the darkness grew. The 
dwarves halted and gazed at the sky. The elves cried out 
with many voices. 

‘Come! ’ called Gandalf. ‘There is yet time for council. 
Let Dain son of Nain come swiftly to us! ’ 

So began a battle that none had expected; and it was 
called the Battle of Five Armies, and it was very terrible. 
Upon one side were the Goblins and the wild Wolves, 
and upon the other were Elves and Men and Dwarves. 
This is how it fell out. Ever since the fall of the Great 
Goblin of the Misty Mountains the hatred of their race 
for the dwarves had been rekindled to fury. Messengers 
had passed to and fro between all their cities, colonies 
and strongholds; for they resolved now to win the 
dominion of the North. Tidings they had gathered in 
secret ways; and in all the mountains there was a forging 
and an arming. Then they marched and gathered by hill 
and valley, going ever by tunnel or under dark, until 
around and beneath the great mountain Gundabad of 
the North, where was their capital, a vast host was 
•Son of Azog, See p. *4. 

«57 



THE HOBBIT 


assembled ready to sweep down in time of storm un- 
awares upon the South. Then they learned of the death 
of Smaug, and joy was in their hearts; and they hastened 
night after night through the mountains, and came thus 
at last on a sudden from the North hard on the heels of 
Dain. Not even the ravens knew of their coming until 
they came out in the broken lands which divided the 
Lonely Mountain from the hills behind. How much Gan- 
dalf knew cannot be said, but it is plain that he had not 
expected this sudden assault. 

This is the plan that he made in council with the 
Elvenking and with Bard; and with Dain, for the dwarf- 
lord now joined them: the Goblins were the foes of all, 
and at their coming all other quarrels were forgotten. 
Their only hope was to lure the goblins into the valley 
between the arms of the Mountain; and themselves to 
man the great spurs that struck south and east. Yet this 
would be perilous, if the goblins were in sufficient 
numbers to overrun the Mountain itself, and so attack 
them also from behind and above; but there was no time 
to make any other plan, or to summon any help. 

Soon the thunder passed, rolling away to the South- 
East; but the bat-cloud came, flying lower, over the 
shoulder of the Mountain, and whirled above them shut¬ 
ting out the light and filling them with dre^d. 

‘To the Mountain!* called Bard. ‘To the Mountain! 
Let us take our places while there is yet time! * 

On the Southern spur, in its lower slopes and in the 
rocks at its feet, the Elves were set; on the Eastern spur 
were men and dwarves. But Bard and some of the nimb¬ 
lest of men and elves climbed to the height of the Eastern 
shoulder to gain a view to the North. Soon they could see 
the lands before the Mountain’s feet black with a hurry¬ 
ing multitude. Ere long the vanguard swirled round the 
spur’s end and came rushing into Dale. These were the 
swiftest wolf-riders, and already their cries and howls rent 
the air afar. A few brave men were strung before them to 

*58 



THE CLOUDS Bl RST 

make a feint of resistance, and many there fell before the 
rest drew back and fled to either side. As Gandalf had 
hoped, the goblin army had gatheied behind the resisted 
vanguard, and poured now in ragf into the valley, driv¬ 
ing wildly up between the arms of ihe Mountain, seeking 
for the foe. Their banners were countless, black and red, 
and they came on like a tide in furv and disorder. 

It was a terrible battle. The most dreadful of all Bilbo’s 
experiences, and the one which at the time he hated most 
- which is to say it was the one he was most proud of, and 
most fond of recalling long afterwards, although he was 
quite unimportant in it. Actually I may say he put on his 
ring early in the business, and vanished from sight, if not 
from all danger. A magic ring of that sort is not a com¬ 
plete protection in a goblin charge, nor does it stop flying 
arrows and wild spears; but it does help in getting out of 
the way, and it prevents your head from being specially 
chosen for a sweeping stroke by a goblin swordsman. 

The elves were the first to charge. Their hatred for the 
goblins is cold and bitter. Their spears and swords shone 
in the gloom with a gleam of chill flame, so deadly was 
the wrath of the hands that held them. As soon as the 
host of their enemies was dense in the valley, they sent 
against it a shower of arrows, and each flickered as it fled 
as if with stinging fire. Behind the arrows a thousand of 
their spearmen leapt down and charged. The yells were 
deafening. The rocks were stained black with goblin 
blood. 

Just as the goblins were recovering from the onslaught 
and the elf-charge was halted, there rose from across the 
valley a deep-throated roar. With cries of ‘Moria! ’ and 
‘Dain, Dain 1 ’ the dwarves of the Iron Hills plunged in, 
wielding their mattocks, upon the other side; and beside 
them came the men of the Lake with long swords. 

Panic came upon the Goblins; and even as they turned 
to meet this new attack, the elves charged again with 
renewed numbers. Already many of the goblins were fly- 

«59 



THE HOBBIT 


ing back down the river to escape from the trap; and 
many of their own wolves were turning upon them and 
rending the dead and the wounded. Victory seemed at 
hand, when a cry rang out on the heights above. 

Goblins had scaled the Mountain from the other side 
and already many were on the slopes above the Gate, and 
others were streaming recklessly, heedless of those that 
fell screaming from cliff and precipice, to attack the spurs 
from above. Each of these could be reached by paths that 
ran down from the main mass of the Mountain in the 
centre; and the defenders had too few to bar the way for 
long. Victory now vanished from hope. They had only 
stemmed the first onslaught of the black tide. 

Day drew on. The goblins gathered again in the valley. 
There a host of Wargs came ravening and with them 
came the bodyguard of Bolg, goblins of huge size with 
scimitars of steel. Soon actual darkness was coming into a 
stormy sky; while still the great bats swirled about the 
heads and ears of elves and men, or fastened vampire-like 
on the stricken. Now Bard was fighting to defend the 
Eastern spur, and yet giving slowly back; and the elf- 
lords were at bay about their king upon the southern 
arm, near to the watch-post on Ravenhill. 

Suddenly there was a great shout, and from the Gate 
came a trumpet call. They had forgotten Thorin 1 Part of 
the wall, moved by levers, fell outward with a crash into 
the pool. Out leapt the King under the Mountain, and 
his companions followed him. Hood and cloak were 
gone; they were in shining armour, and red light leapt 
from their eyes. In the gloom the great dwarf gleamed 
like gold in a dying fire. 

Rocks were hurled down from on high by the goblins 
above,* but they held on, leapt down to the falls’ foot, and 
rushed forward to battle. Wolf and rider fell or fled be¬ 
fore them. Thorin wielded his axe with mighty strokes, 
and nothing seemed to harm him. 

*To me! To me I Elves and Men! To me! O my 

t6o 



THE CLOUDS BURST 

kinsfolk I * he cried, and his voice .shook like a horn in the 
valley. 

Down, heedless of order, rushed all the dwarves of 
Dain to his help. Down too came many of the Lake-men, 
for Bard could not restrain them; .ind out upon the other 
side came many of the spearmen *>£ the elves. Once again 
the goblins were stricken in the valley; and they were 
piled in heaps till Dale was dark and hideous with their 
corpses. The Wargs were scattered and Thorin drove 
right against the bodyguard of Holg. But he could not 
pierce their ranks. 

Already behind him among the goblin dead lay many 
men and many dwarves, and many a fair elf that should 
have lived yet long ages merrily in the wood. And as the 
valley widened his onset grew ever slower. His numbers 
were too few. His flanks were unguarded. Soon the 
attackers were attacked, and they were forced into a great 
ring, facing every way, hemmed all about with goblins 
and wolves returning to the assault. The bodyguard of 
Bolg came howling against them, and drove in upon 
their ranks like waves upon cliffs of sand. Their friends 
could not help them, for the assault from the Mountain 
was renewed with redoubled force, and upon either side 
men and elves were being slowly beaten down. 

On all this Bilbo looked with misery. He had taken his 
stand on Ravenhill among the Elves - partly because there 
was more chance of escape from that point, and partly 
(with the more Tookish part of his mind) because if he 
was going to be in a last desperate stand, he preferred on 
the whole to defend the Elvenking. Gandalf, too, I may 
say, was there, sitting on the ground as if in deep 
thought, preparing, I suppose, some last blast of magic 
before the end. 

That did not seem far off. ‘It will not be long now,* 
thought Bilbo, ‘before the goblins win the Gate, and we 
^re all slaughtered or driven down and captured. Really 
>^is enough to make one weep, after all one has gone 

a6i 



THE HOBBIT 


through. I would rather old Smaug had been left with all 
the wretched treasure, than that these vile creatures 
should get it, and poor old Bombur and Balin and Fili 
and Kili and all the rest come to a bad end; and Bard 
too, and the Lake-men and the merry elves. Misery me! I 
have heard songs of many battles, and I have always un¬ 
derstood that defeat may be glorious. It seems very uncom¬ 
fortable, not to say distressing. I wish I was well out of it.’ 

The clouds were torn by the wind, and a red sunset 
slashed the West. Seeing the sudden gleam in the gloom 
Bilbo looked round. He gave a great cry: he had seen a 
sight that made his heart leap, dark shapes small yet 
majestic against the distant glow. 

‘The Eagles 1 The Eagles 1 * he shouted. ‘The Eagles are 
coming I' 

Bilbo’s eyes were seldom wrong. The eagles were com¬ 
ing down the wind, line after line, in such a host as must 
have gathered from all the eyries of the North. 

‘The Eagles! The Eagles!’ Bilbo cried, dancing and 
waving his arms. If the elves could not see him they could 
hear him. Soon they too took up the cry, and it echoed 
across the valley. Many wondering eyes looked up, 
though as yet nothing could be seen except from the 
southern shoulders of the Mountain. 

‘The Eagles!’ cried Bilbo once more, but at that mo¬ 
ment a stone hurtling from above smote heavily on his 
helm, and he fell with a crash and knew no more. 


18 The return journey 

When Bilbo came to himself, he was literally by himself. 
He was lying on the flat stones of Ravenhill, and no one 
was near. A cloudless day, but cold, was broad above him. 

s 62 



THE RETURN JOURNEY 

He was shaking, and as chilled as stone, but his head 
burned with fire. 

‘Now I wonder what has happened?’ he said to himself. 
‘At any rate I am not yet one of the fallen heroes; but I 
suppose there is still time enough for that! ’ 

He sat up painfully. Looking into the valley he could 
see no living goblins. After a while as his head cleared a 
little, he thought he could see elves moving in the rocks 
below. He rubbed his eyes. Surely there was a camp still 
in the plain some distance off; and there was a coming 
and going about the Gate? Dwarves seemed to be busy 
removing the wall. But all was deadly still. There was no 
call and no echo of song. Sorrow seemed to be in the air. 

‘Victory after all, I suppose!' he said, feeling his aching 
head. ‘Well, it seems a very gloomy business.* 

Suddenly he was aware of a man climbing up and 
coming towards him. 

‘Hullo there 1 * he called with a shaky voice. ‘Hullo 
there! What news?* 

‘What voice is it that speaks among the stones?* said 
the man, halting and peering about him not far from 
where Bilbo sat. 

Then Bilbo remembered his ring! ‘Well I*m blessed! * 
said he. ‘This invisibility has its drawbacks after all. 
Otherwise I suppose I might have spent a warm and com¬ 
fortable night in bed!’ 

‘It*s me, Bilbo Baggins, companion of Thorin!* he 
cried, hurriedly taking oft the ring. 

It is well that I have found you! * said the man striding 
forward. ‘You are needed and we have looked for you 
long. You would have been numbered among the dead, 
who are many, if Gandalf the wizard had not said that 
your voice was last heard in this place. I have been sent 
to look here for the last time. Are you much hurt?* 

‘A nasty knock on the head, I think,’ said Bilbo. ‘But I 
^ve my helm and a hard skull. All the same I feel sick 
Jpd my legs are like straws.’ 



THE HOBBIT 


‘I will carry you down to the camp in the valley/ said 
the man, and picked him lightly up. 

The man was swift and sure-footed. It was not long 
before Bilbo was set down before a tent in Dale; and 
there stood Gandalf, with his arm in a sling. Even the 
wizard had not escaped without a wound; and there were 
few unharmed in all the host. 

When Gandalf saw Bilbo, he was delighted. 'Baggins!* 
he exclaimed. ‘Well I never! Alive after all - I am glad! 
I began to wonder if even your luck would see you 
through! A terrible business, and it nearly was disastrous. 
But other news can wait. Come I * he said more gravely. 
‘You are called for;* and leading the hobbit he took him 
within the tent. 

‘Hail! Thorin,’ he said as he entered. ‘I have brought 
him.* 

There indeed lay Thorin Oakenshield, wounded with 
many wounds, and his rent armour and notched axe were 
cast upon the floor. He looked up as Bilbo came beside 
him. 

‘Farewell, good thief,* he said. ‘I go now to the halls of 
^waiting to sit beside my fathers, until the world is re¬ 
newed. Since I leave now all gold and silver, and go 
where it is of little worth, I wish to part in friendship 
from you, and I would take back my words and deeds at 
the Gate.* 

Bilbo knelt on one knee filled with sorrow. ‘Farewell, 
King under the Mountain!* he said. ‘This is a bitter 
adventure, if it must end so; and not a mountain of gold 
can amend it. Yet I am glad that I have shared in your 
perils - that has been more than any Baggins deserves.* 

‘No! * said Thorin. ‘There is more in you of good than 
you know, child of the kindly West. Some courage and 
some wisdom, blended in measure. If more of us valued 
food and cheer and song above hoarded gold, it would be 
a merrier world. But sad or merry, I must leave it now. 
Farewell I * 

964 



THE RETURN JOURNEY 

Then Bilbo turned away, and lie went by himself, and 
sat alone wrapped in a blanket, and, whether you believe 
it or not, he wept until his eyes were red and his voice 
was hoarse. He was a kindly little soul. Indeed it was long 
before he had the heart to make a joke again. 'A mercy it 
is,' he said at last to himself, 'that I woke up when I did. I 
wish Thorin were living, but I am glad that we parted in 
kindness. You are a fool. Bilbo Baggins, and you made a 
great mess of that business with the stone; and there was 
a battle, in spite of all your efforts to buy peace and 
quiet, but I suppose you can hardly be blamed for that.' 

All that had happened after he was stunned, Bilbo 
learned later; but it gave him more sorrow than joy, and 
he was now weary of his adventure. He was aching in his 
bones for the homeward journey. That, however, was a 
little delayed, so in the meantime I will tell something of 
events. The Eagles had long had suspicion of the goblins' 
mustering; from their watchfulness the movements in the 
mountains could not be altogether hid. So they too had 
gathered in great numbers, under the great Eagle of the 
Misty Mountains; and at length smelling battle from afaj, 
they had come speeding down the gale in the nick of 
time. They it was who dislodged the goblins from the 
mountain-slopes, casting them over precipices, or driving 
them down shrieking and bewildered among their foes. It 
was not long before they had freed the Lonely Mountain, 
and elves and men on either side of the valley could come 
at last to the help of the battle below. 

But even with the Eagles they were still outnumbered. 
In that last hour Beorn himself had appeared - no one 
knew how or from where. He came alone, and in bear's 
shape; and he seemed to have grown almost to giant-size 
in his wrath. 

The roar of his voice was like drums and guns; and he 
tossed wolves and goblins from his path like straws and 
feathers. He fell upon their rear, and broke like a clap of 

965 



THE HOBBIT 


thunder through the ring. The dwarves were making a 
stand still about their lords upon a low rounded hill. 
Then Beorn stopped and lifted Thorin, who had fallen 
pierced with spears, and bore him out of the fray. 

Swiftly he returned and his wrath was redoubled, so 
that nothing could withstand him, and no weapon 
seemed to bite upon him. He scattered the bodyguard, 
and pulled down Bolg himself and crushed him. Then 
dismay fell on the Goblins and they fled in all directions. 
But weariness left their enemies with the coming of new 
hope, and they pursued them closely, and prevented most 
of them from escaping where they could. They drove 
many of them into the Running River, and such as fled 
south or west they hunted into the marshes about the 
Forest River; and there the greater part of the last fugi¬ 
tives perished, while those that came hardly to the Wood- 
elves* realm were there slain, or drawn in to die deep in 
the trackless dark of Mirkwood. Songs have said that 
three parts of the goblin warriors of the North perished 
on that day, and the mountains had peace for many a 
year. 

Victory had been assured before the fall of night, but 
the pursuit was still on foot when Bilbo returned to the 
camp; and not many were in the valley save the more 
grievously wounded. 

‘Where are the Eagles?’ he asked Gandalf that evening, 
as he lay wrapped in many warm blankets. 

‘Some are in the hunt,’ said the wizard, ‘but most have 
gone back to their eyries. They would not stay here, and 
departed with the first light of morning. Dain has 
crowned their chief with gold, and sworn friendship with 
them for ever.’ 

‘I am sorry. I mean, I should have liked to see them 
again,’ said Bilbo sleepily; ‘perhaps 1 shall see them on 
the way home. I suppose I shall be going home soon?’ 

‘As soon as you like,’ said the wizard. 

Actually it was some days before Bilbo really set out. 

s66 



THE RETURN JOURNEY 

They buried Thorin deep bene;jth the Mountain, and 
Bard laid the Arkenstone upon his breast. 

‘There let it lie till the Mountain falls I * he said. ‘May it 
bring good fortune to all his folk that dwell here after!' 

Upon his tomb the Elvenking then laid Orcrist, the 
elvish sword that had been taken from Thorin in cap¬ 
tivity. It is said in songs that it gleamed ever in the dark 
if foes approached, and the fortre ss of the dwarves could 
not be taken by surprise. There now Dain son of Nain 
took up his abode, and he became King under the Moun¬ 
tain, and in time many other dwarves gathered to his 
throne in the ancient halls. Of the twelve companions of 
Thorin, ten remained. Fili and Kili had fallen defending 
him with shield and body, for he was their mother's elder 
brother. The others remained with Dain; for Dain dealt 
his treasure well. 

There was, of course, no longer any question of divid¬ 
ing the hoard in such shares as had been planned, to 
Balin and Dwalin, and Dori and Nori and Ori, and Oin 
and Gloin, and Bifur and Bofur and Bombur - or to 
Bilbo. Yet a fourteenth share of all the silver and gold, 
wrought and unwrought, was given up to Bard; for Dain 
said: ‘We will honour the agreement of the dead, and he 
has now the Arkenstone in his keeping.' 

Even a fourteenth share was wealth exceedingly great, 
greater than that of many mortal kings. From that 
treasure Bard sent much gold to the Master of Lake- 
town; and he rewarded his followers and friends freely. 
To the Elvenking he gave the emeralds of Girion, such 
jewels as he most loved, which Dain had restored to him. 

To Bilbo he said! ‘This treasure is as much yours as it 
is mine; though old agreements cannot stand, since so 
many have a claim in its winning and defence. Yet even 
though you were willing to lay aside all your claim, I 
should wish that the words of Thorin, of which he re¬ 
pented, should not prove true: that we should give you 
little. I would reward you most richly of all.' 

167 



THE HOBBIT 


*Very kind of you/ said Bilbo. ‘But really it is a relief 
to me. How on earth should I have got all that treasure 
home without war and murder all along the way, I don't 
know. And I don't know what I should have done with it 
when I got home. I am sure it is better in your hands.’ 

In the end he would only take two small chests, one 
filled with silver, and the other with gold, such as one 
strong pony could carry. ‘That will be quite as much as I 
can manage,' said he. 

At last the time came for him to say good-bye to 
his friends. ‘Farewell, BalinI' he said; ‘and farewell, 
Dwalin; and farewell Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, Gloin, Bifur, 
Bofur, and Bombur! May your beards never grow thin I' 
And turning towards the Mountain he added: ‘Farewell 
Thorin Oakenshieldl And Fili and Kilil May your 
memory never fade 1' 

Then the dwarves bowed low before their Gate, but 
words stuck in their throats. ‘Good-bye and good luck, 
wherever you fare!' said Balin at last. ‘If ever you visit us 
again, when our halls are made fair once more, then the 
feast shall indeed be splendid!' 

‘If ever you are passing my way,’ said Bilbo, ‘don't wait 
to knock! Tea is at four; but any of you are welcome at 
any time!' 

Then he turned away. 

The elf-host was on the march; and if it was sadly 
lessened, yet many were glad, for now the northern world 
would be merrier for many a long day. The dragon was 
dead, and the goblins overthrown, and their hearts 
looked forward after winter to a spring of joy. 

Gandalf and Bilbo rode behind the Elvenking, and be¬ 
side them strode Beorn, once again in man's shape, and 
he laughed and sang in a loud voice upon the road. So 
they went on until they drew near to the borders of 
Mirkwood, to the north of the place where the Forest 
River ran out. Then they halted, for the wizard and 

268 



THE RETURN JOURNEY 

Bilbo would not enter the woo^l, even though the king 
bade them stay a while in his halls. They intended to go 
along the edge of the forest, and round its northern end 
in the waste that lay between it and the beginning of the 
Grey Mountains. It was a long and cheerless road, but 
now that the goblins were crushed, it seemed safer to 
them than the dreadful pathways under the trees. More¬ 
over Beorn was going that way too. 

‘Farewell! O Elvenkingl* said Gandalf. ‘Merry be the 
greenwood, while the world is yet young! And merry be 
all your folk! * 

‘Farewell! O Gandalf!' said the king. ‘May you ever 
appear where you are most needed and least expected! 
The oftener you appear in my halls the better shall I be 
pleased!' 

‘I beg of you,' said Bilbo stammering and standing on 
one foot, ‘to accept this gift!' and he brought out a neck¬ 
lace of silver and pearls that Dain had given him at their 
parting. 

‘In what way have I earned such a gift, O hobbit?' said 
the king. 

‘Well, er, I thought, don't you know,' said Bilbo rather 
confused, ‘that, er, some little return should be made for 
your, er, hospitality. I mean even a burglar has his feel¬ 
ings. I have drunk much of your wine and eaten much of 
your bread.' 

‘I will take your gift, O Bilbo the Magnificent!' said 
the king gravely. ‘And I name you elf-friend and blessed. 
May your shadow never grow less (or stealing would be 
too easy)! Farewell!' 

Then the elves turned towards the Forest, and Bilbo 
started on his long road home. 

He had many hardships and adventures before he got 
back. The Wild was still the Wild, and there were many 
other things in it in those days beside goblins; but he was 
well guided and well guarded - the wizard was with him, 

a6g 



THE HOBBIT 


and Beorn for much of the way - and he was never in 
great danger again. Anyway by mid-winter Gandalf and 
Bilbo had come all the way back, along both edges of the 
Forest, to the doors of Beorn's house; and there for a 
while they both stayed. Yule-tide was warm and merry 
there; and men came from far and wide to feast at 
Beorn's bidding. The goblins of the Misty Mountains 
were now few and terrified, and hidden in the deepest 
holes they could find; and the Wargs had vanished from 
the woods, so that men went abroad without fear. Beorn 
indeed became a great chief afterwards in those regions 
and ruled a wild land between the mountains and the 
wood; and it is said that for many generations the men of 
his line had the power of taking bear's shape, and some 
were grim men and bad, but most were in heart like 
Beorn, if less in size and strength. In their day the last 
goblins were hunted from the Misty Mountains and a 
new peace came over the edge of the Wild. 

It was spring, and a fair one with mild weathers and a 
bright sun, before Bilbo and Gandalf took their leave at 
last of Beorn, and though he longed for home. Bilbo left 
with regret, for the flowers of the gardens of Beorn were 
in spring-time no less marvellous than in high summer. 

At last they came up the long road, and reached the 
very pass where the goblins had captured them before. 
But they came to that high point at morning, and looking 
ba^wards they saw a white sun shining over the out¬ 
stretched lands. There behind lay Mirkwood, blue in the 
distance, and darkly green at the nearer edge even in the 
spring. There far away was the Lonely Mountain on the 
edge of eyesight. On its highest peak snow yet unmelted 
was gleaming pale. 

‘So comes snow after fire, and even dragons have their 
ending!* said Bilbo, and he turned his back on the 
adventure. The Tookish part was getting very tired, and 
the Baggins was daily getting stronger. *I wish now only 
to be in my own arm-^air! * he said. 

9^o 



19 The last stage 

It was on May the First that the two came back at last to 
the brink of the valley of Ri vend ell, where stood the Last 
(or the First) Homely House. Again it was evening, their 
ponies were tired, especially the one that carried the 
baggage; and they all felt in need of rest. As they rode 
down the steep path, Bilbo heard the elves still singing in 
the trees, as if they had not stopped since he left; and as 
soon as the riders came down into the lower glades of the 
wood they burst into a song of much the same kind as 
before. This is something like it; 

The dragon is withered, 

His bones are now crumbled; 

His armour is shivered, 

His splendour is humbled! 

Though sword shall be rusted. 

And throne and crown perish 
With strength that men trusted 
And wealth that they cherish, 

Here grass is still growing. 

And leaves are yet swinging. 

The white water flowing. 

And elves are yet singing 
Come! Tra-lada-lally! 

Come back to the valley! 

The stars are far brighter 
Than gems without measure. 

The moon is far whiter 
; Than silver in treasure: 

The fire is more shining 
On hearth in the gloaming 
«7i 



THE HOBBIT 


Than gold won by mining, 

So why go a-roamingf 
O! Tra-ladadally 
Come back to the Valley. 

Ol Where are you going. 

So late in returning? 

The river is flowing. 

The stars are all burning! 

O! Whither so laden, 

So sad and so dreary? 

Here elf and elf-maiden 
Now welcome the weary 
With Tra-la-la-lally 
Come back to the Valley, 

Tra-la-la-lally 

Fa-la-la-lally 

Fa-la! 

Then the elves of the valley came out and greeted 
them and led them across the water to the house of 
Elrond. There a warm welcome was made them, and 
there were many eager ears that evening to hear the tale 
of their adventures. Gandalf it was who spoke, for Bilbo 
was fallen quiet and drowsy. Most of the tale he knew, 
for. he had been in it, and had himself told much of it to 
the wizard on their homeward way or in the house of 
Beom; but every now and again he would open one eye, 
and listen, when a part of the story which he did not yet 
know came in. 

It was in this way that he learned where Gandalf had 
been to; for he overheard the words of the wizard to 
Elrond. It appeared that Gandalf had been to a great 
council of the white wizards, masters of lore and good 
magic; and that they had at last driven the Necromancer 
from his dark hold in the south of Mirkwood. 

*Erc long now,’ Gandalf was saying, ‘the Forest will 

* 7 * 



THE LAST STAGE 


grow somewhat more wholes(»me. The North will be 
freed from that horror for manv long years, I hope. Yet I 
wish he were banished from the world!' 

‘It would be well indeed,’ sard Elrond; ‘but I fear that 
will not come about in this age of the world, or for many 
after.’ 

When the tale of their journ< yings was told, there were 
other tales, and yet more tales, tales of long ago, and tales 
of new things, and tales of no time at all, till Bilbo's head 
fell forward on his chest, and he snored comfortably in a 
corner. 

He woke to find himself in a white bed, and the moon 
shining through an open window. Below it many elves 
were singing loud and clear on the banks of the stream. 

Sing all ye joyful, now sing all together! 

The wind*s in the tree-top, the wind*s in the heather; 

The stars are in blossom, the moon is in flower, 

And bright are the windows of Night in her tower. 

Dance all ye joyful, now dance all together! 

Soft is the grass, and let foot be like feather! 

The river is silver, the shadows are fleeting; 

Merry is May-time, and merry our meeting. 

Sing we now softly, and dreams let us weave him!> 

Wind him in slumber and there let us leave him! 

The wanderer sleepeth. Now soft be his pillow! 

Lullaby! Lullaby! Alder and Willow! 

Sigh no more Pine, till the wind of the morn! 

Fall Moon! Dark be the land! 

Hush! Hush! Oak, Ash, and Thorn! 

Hushed be all water, till dawn is at hand! 

‘Well, Merry People!’ said Bilbo looking out. ‘What 
time by the moon is this? Your lullaby would waken a 
drunken goblin! Yet I thank you.* 

«7S 



THE HOBBIT 


‘And your snores would waken a stone dragon - yet' 
thank you/ they answered with laughter. It is drawiii^ 
towards dawn, and you have slept now since the night’s 
beginning. Tomorrow, perhaps, you will be cured of 
weariness.’ 

‘A little sleep does a great cure in the house of Elrond,’ 
said he; ‘but I will take all the cure I can get. A second 
good night, fair friends! ’ And with that he went back if 
bed and slept till late morning. 

Weariness fell from him soon in that house, and he had 
many a merry jest and dance, early and late, with the 
elves of the valley. Yet even that place could not long 
delay him now, and he thought always of his own ho:?je. 
After a week, therefore, he said farewell to Elrond, and 
giving him such small gifts as he would accept, he rode 
away with Gandalf. 

Even as they left the valley the sky darkened in the 
West before them, and wind and rain came up to meet 
them. 

‘Merry is May-time! ’ said Bilbo, as the rain beat into 
his face. ‘But our back is to legends and we are coming 
home. I suppose this is a first taste of it.’ 

‘There is a long road yet,’ said Gandalf. r' 

‘But it is the last road,’ said Bilbo. 

They came to the river that marked the very edge of 
the borderland of the Wild, and to the ford beneath the 
steep bank, which you may remember. The water was 
swollen both with the melting of the snows at the 
approach of summer, and with the daylong rain; but they 
crossed with some difficulty, and pressed forward, as even¬ 
ing fell, on the last stage of their journey. 

This was much as it had been before, except that the 
company was smaller, and more silent; also this time 
there were no trolls. At each point on the road Bilbo 
recalled the happenings and the words of a year ago - it 
seemed to him more like ten - so that, of course, he 
quickly noted the place where the pony had fallen in the 

«74 



THE LAST STAGE 


^vjer, and they had turned aside for their nasty adventure 
Tom and Bert and Bill. 

Not far from the road they found the gold of the trolls, 
which they had buried, still hidden and untouched. *1 
have enough to last me my tinie,* said Bilbo, when they 
had dug it up. ‘You had better i ake this, Gandalf. I dare¬ 
say you can find a use for it.* 

c‘Indeed I can!* said the wizard. ‘But share and share 
4ike 1 You may find you have more needs than you expect.* 

So they put the gold in bags and slung them on the 
ponies, who were not at all pleased about it. After that 
their going was slower, for most of the time they walked. 
Br the land was green and there was much grass through 
which the hobbit strolled along contentedly. He mopped 
his face with a red silk handkerchief - no! Not a single 
one of his own had survived, he had borrowed this one 
from Elrond - for now June had brought summer, and 
the weather was bright and hot again. 

As all things come to an end, even this story, a day 
came at last when they were in sight of the country where 
Bilbo had been born and bred, where the shapes of the 
land and of the trees were as well known to him as his 
.ands and toes. Coming to a rise he could see his own 
Hill in the distance, and he stopped suddenly and said: 

Roads go ever ever on, 

Over rock and under tree, 

By caves where never sun has shone. 

By streams that never find the sea; 

Over snow by winter sown, 

And through the merry flowers of June, 
Over grass and over stone. 

And under mountains in the moon. 

Roads go ever ever on 

Under cloud and under star. 

Yet feet that wandering have gone 

m 



THE HOBBIT 


Turn at last to home afar. 

Eyes that fire and sword have seen 
And horror in the halls of stone 
Look at last on meadows green 
And trees and hills they long have known. 

Gandalf looked at him. ‘My dear Bilbo I* he said. 
‘Something is the matter with you! You are not th- 
hobbit that you were.’ 

And so they crossed the bridge and passed the mill by 
the river and came right back to Bilbo’s own door. 

‘Bless me! What’s going on?’ he cried. There was a 
great commotion, and people of all sorts, respectable and 
unrespectable, were thick round the door, and many were 
going in and out - not even wiping their feet on the mat, 
as Bilbo noticed with annoyance. 

If he was surprised, they were more surprised still. He 
had arrived back in the middle of an auction I There was 
a large notice in black and red hung on the gate, stating 
that on June the Twenty-second Messrs. Grubb, Grubb, 
and Burrowes would sell by auction the effec: of the late 
Bilbo Baggins Esquire, of Bag-End, UnderbiL Hobbiton. 
Sale to commence at ten o’clock sharp. It now nearly 
lunch time, and most of the things had already been sold, 
for various prices from next to nothing to old songs (as is 
not unusual at auctions). Bilbo’s cousins the Sackville. 
Bagginses were, in fact, busy measuring his rooms to see if 
their own furniture would fit. In short Bilbo was ‘Pre¬ 
sumed Dead’, and not everybody that said so was sorry to 
find the. presumption wrong. 

The return of Mr. Bilbo Baggins created quite a dis¬ 
turbance, both under the Hill and over the Hill, and 
across the Water; it was a great deal more than a nine 
days’ wonder. The legal bother, indeed, lasted for years, Ii 
was quite a long time before Mr. Baggins was in fact 
admitted to be alive again. The people who had got 
specially good bargains at the Sale took a deal of con- 

*76 



THE LAST STAGE 


vincing; and in the end to sa% e time Bilbo had to buy 
back quite a lot of his own furniture. Many of his silver 
spoons mysteriously disappeai ed and were never ac¬ 
counted for. Personally he susoected the Sackville-Bag- 
ginses. On their side they never admitted that the return¬ 
ed Baggins was genuine, and they were not on friendly 
terms with Bilbo ever after. They really had wanted to 
live in his nice hobbit-hole so very much. 

Indeed Bilbo found he had lost more than spoons - he 
had lost his reputation. It is tine that for ever after he 
remained an elf-friend, and had the honour of dwarves, 
wizards, and all such folk as ever passed that way; but he 
was no longer quite respectable. He was in fact held by 
all the hobbits of the neighbourhood to be ‘queer* - 
except by his nephews and nieces on the Took side, but 
even they were not encouraged in their friendship by 
their elders. 

I am sorry to say he did not mind. He was quite con¬ 
tent; and the sound of the kettle on his hearth was ever 
after more musical than it'had been even in the quiet 
days befor'rthe Unexpected Party. His sword he hung 
over the m^intelpiece. His coat of mail was arranged on a 
stand in the -lall (until he lent it to a Museum). His gold 
and silver was largely spent in presents, both useful and 
extravagant - which to a certain extent accounts for the 
ffection of his nephews and his nieces. His magic ring he 
Kept a great secret, for he chiefly used it when unpleasant 
callers came. 

He took to writing poetry and visiting the elves; and 
though many shook their heads and touched their fore¬ 
heads and said ‘Poor old Baggins! ’ and though few be¬ 
lieved any of his tales, he remained very happy to the end 
of his days, and those were extraordinarily long. 

J 

One autumn evening some years afterwards Bilbo was 
sitting in his study writing his memoirs - he thought of 
calling them ‘There and Back Again, a Hobbit’s Holiday’ 

THE HOBBIT 


- when there was a ring at the door. It was Gandalf and a 
dwarf; and the dwarf was actually Balin. 

‘Come in! Come in 1 ’ said Bilbo, and soon they were 
settled in chairs by the fire. If Balin noticed that Mr. 
Baggins’ waistcoat was more extensive (and had real gold 
buttons), Bilbo also noticed that Balin’s beard '^as 
several inches longer, and his jewelled belt was '• 
magnificence. 

They fell to talking of their times together, of course, 
and Bilbo asked how things were going in the lands of 
the Mountain. It seemed they were going very well. Bard 
had rebuilt the town in Dale and men had gathered to 
him from the Lake and from South and West, and all the 
valley had become tilled again and rich, and the desola¬ 
tion was now filled with birds and blossoms in spring and 
fruit and feasting in autumn. And Lake-town was re¬ 
founded and was more prosperous than ever, and much 
wealth went up and down the Running River; and there 
was friendsMp in those parts between elves and dwarves 
and men. * . 

The old Master had come to a bad end. Bard had giv< 
him much ^Id for the help of the Lake-people, but bein 
of the kind that easily catches such disease he fell und- 
the dragon-sickness, and took most of the gold and fl 
with it, and died of starvation in the Waste, deserted 
his companions. 

‘The new Master is of wiser kind,’said Balin, ‘and ve 
popular, for, of course, he gets most of the credit for th 
present prosperity. They are making songs which say th»* 
in his day the rivers run with gold.' 

‘Then the prophecies of the old songs have turned oi 
to be true, aft^r a fashion!' said Bilbo. 

‘Of course I' said Gandalf. ‘And why should not the^ 
prove true? Surely you don't disbelieve the prophecie 
because you had a hand in bringing them about your 
self? You don’t really suppose, do you, that all youi 
adventures and escapes were managed by mere luck, just 

«78 



THE LAST STAGE 


for your sole benefit? You are a very fine person, Mr. 
Baggins, and I am very fond if you; but you are only 
quite a little fellow in a wide world after all!’ 

‘Thank goodness!’ said Bilbo laughing, and handed 
him the tobacco-jar. 


‘Just  hold  on  a  moment,  and  I’ll  get  my  stuff!’  cried  Sam 
eagerly.  ‘It’s  all  ready.  I  thought  we  should  be  off  today.’  He 
rushed  to  the  camping  place,  fished  out  his  pack  from  the 
pile  where  Frodo  had  laid  it  when  he  emptied  the  boat  of  his 
companions’  goods,  grabbed  a  spare  blanket,  and  some  extra 
packages  of  food,  and  ran  back. 

‘So  all  my  plan  is  spoilt!’  said  Frodo.  ‘It  is  no  good  trying 
to  escape  you.  But  I’m  glad,  Sam.  I  cannot  tell  you  how  glad. 
Come  along!  It  is  plain  that  we  were  meant  to  go  together. 
We  will  go,  and  may  the  others  find  a  safe  road!  Strider  will 
look  after  them.  I  don’t  suppose  we  shall  see  them  again.’ 

‘Yet  we  may,  Mr.  Frodo.  We  may,’  said  Sam. 

So  Frodo  and  Sam  set  off  on  the  last  stage  of  the  Quest 
together.  Frodo  paddled  away  from  the  shore,  and  the  River 


THE  BREAKING  OF  THE  FELLOWSHIP  531 

bore  them  swiftly  away,  down  the  western  arm,  and  past  the 
frowning  cliffs  of  Tol  Brandir.  The  roar  of  the  great  falls 
drew  nearer.  Even  with  such  help  as  Sam  could  give,  it  was 
hard  work  to  pass  across  the  current  at  the  southward  end  of 
the  island  and  drive  the  boat  eastward  towards  the  far  shore. 

At  length  they  came  to  land  again  upon  the  southern  slopes 
of  Amon  Lhaw.  There  they  found  a  shelving  shore,  and  they 
drew  the  boat  out,  high  above  the  water,  and  hid  it  as  well  as 
they  could  behind  a  great  boulder.  Then  shouldering  their 
burdens,  they  set  off,  seeking  a  path  that  would  bring  them 
over  the  grey  hills  of  the  Emyn  Muil,  and  down  into  the  Land 
of  Shadow. 


MAPS 


WORKS  BY  J.R.R.  TOLKIEN 
The  Hobbit 
Leaf  by  Niggle 
On  Fairy-Stories 
Farmer  Giles  of  Ham 
The  Homecoming  of  Beorhtnoth 
The  Lord  of  the  Rings 
The  Adventures  of  Tom  Bombadil 
The  Road  Goes  Ever  On  (with  Donald  Swann) 

Smith  of  Wootton  Major 

WORKS  PUBLISHED  POSTHUMOUSLY 

Sir  Gawain  and  the  Green  Knight,  Pearl  and  Sir  Orfeo 
The  Father  Christmas  Letters 
The  Silmarillion 
Pictures  by  J.R.R.  Tolkien 
Unfinished  Tales 
The  Letters  of  J.R.R.  Tolkien 
Finn  and  Hengest 
Mr  Bliss 

The  Monsters  and  the  Critics  &  Other  Essays 
Roverandom 
The  Children  of  Hurin 
The  Legend  of  Sigurd  and  Gudrun 

THE  HISTORY  OF  MIDDLE-EARTH  -  BY  CHRISTOPHER  TOLKIEN 

I  The  Book  of  Lost  Tales,  Part  One 

II  The  Book  of  Lost  Tales,  Part  Two 

III  The  Lays  of  Beleriand 
IV  The  Shaping  of  Middle-earth 
V  The  Lost  Road  and  Other  Writings 

VI  The  Return  of  the  Shadow 

VII  The  Treason  of  Isengard 
VIII  The  War  of  the  Ring 

IX  Sauron  Defeated 
X  Morgoth’s  Ring 
XI  The  War  of  the  Jewels 
XII  The  Peoples  of  Middle-earth 


Copyright 


HarperCollins  Publishers 

77-85  Fulham  Palace  Road, 

Hammersmith,  London  W6  8JB 

www.tolkien.co.uk 

www.tolkienestate.com 

Published  by  HarperCollins  Publishers  2008 
1 

This  edition  is  based  on  the  reset  edition  first  published  2004 

First  published  in  Great  Britain  by  George  Allen  &  Unwin  1954 
Second  Edition  1966 


Copyright  ©  The  Trustees  of  the  J.R.R.Tolkien  1967  Settlement  1954, 1966 

/V-.® 

/T-v  and  ‘Tolkien’®  are  registered  trademarks  of 
J/1V  The  J.R.R.  Tolkien  Estate  Limited 

AER  Edition  ©  March  2009  ISBN:  978-0-061-91767-7 

All  rights  reserved  under  International  and  Pan-American  Copyright 
Conventions.  By  payment  of  the  required  fees,  you  have  been  granted  the  non¬ 
exclusive,  non-transferable  right  to  access  and  read  the  text  of  this  e-book  on¬ 
screen.  No  part  of  this  text  may  be  reproduced,  transmitted,  down-loaded, 
decompiled,  reverse  engineered,  or  stored  in  or  introduced  into  any  information 
storage  and  retrieval  system,  in  any  form  or  by  any  means,  whether  electronic  or 
mechanical,  now  known  or  hereinafter  invented,  without  the  express  written 
permission  of  HarperCollins  e-books. 


HarperCollins  e-books 


ABOUT  THE  PUBLISHER 

Australia 

HarperCollins  Publishers  (Australia)  Pty.  Ltd. 

25  Ryde  Road  (PO  Box  321) 

Pymble,  NSW  2073,  Australia 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au 

Canada 

HarperCollins  Canada 
2  Bloor  Street  East  -  20th  Floor 
Toronto,  ON,  M4W  1A8,  Canada 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca 

New  Zealand 

HarperCollinsPublishers  (New  Zealand)  Limited 
P.O.  Box  1 

Auckland,  New  Zealand 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz 

United  Kingdom 

HarperCollins  Publishers  Ltd. 

77-85  Fulham  Palace  Road 
London,  W6  8JB,  UK 
United  States 

HarperCollins  Publishers  Inc. 

10  East  53rd  Street 

New  York,  NY  10022 